Support color spaces (#2832)
sass/language: proposal/color-4-new-spaces.md

spaces, each with its own syntax, representing both new color models and
wider RGB gamuts.

Since all CSS colors up until this point have been restricted to RGB math in
the sRGB gamut, Sass has treated all color formats as interchangeable. That
has allowed authors to inspect and manipulate colors in any space, without
careful management or gamut mapping. It has also allowed Sass to output the
most browser-compatible CSS format for any given color.

In order to support the color spaces in CSS Sass will need to start tracking
the space and gamut associated with any given color, and provide author tools
for managing those color spaces. In addition to supporting the new color space
functions, we plan to update all functions in the color module, and provide
some additional space and gamut management and inspection functions.

## Summary

> This section is non-normative.

This proposal defines Sassified versions of all the color functions in
[CSS Color Level 4][color-4]. Since the CIE color space defines the entire
gamut of visible color, much larger than the target sRGB gamut, out-of-range
color definitions will be clipped using a *relative-colorimetric* approach that

> leaves in-gamut colors un-affected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
leaves in-gamut colors unaffected.
```

The `oklab()` (cubic) and `oklch()` (cylindrical) functions provide access to
an unbounded gamut of colors in perceptually uniform space. Authors can use
these functions to define reliably uniform colors. For example, the following
colors are perceptually similar in both luminosity and saturation. The `oklch()`
format reflects that with consistent 'lightness' and 'chroma' values, while the
`hsl()` format shows dramatic changes in both 'lightness' and 'saturation':

```scss
$pink: oklch(64% 0.196 353); // hsl(329.8 70.29% 58.75%)
$blue: oklch(64% 0.196 253); // hsl(207.4 99.22% 50.69%)
```

The new `color()` function provides access to a number of specialty spaces.
Most notably, `display-p3` is a common space for wide-gamut monitors, making
it likely one of the more popular options for authors who simply want access to
a wider range of colors. For example, P3 greens are significantly 'brighter'
and more saturated than the greens available in sRGB:

```scss
$fallback-green: rgb(0% 100% 0%);
$brighter-green: color(display-p3 0 1 0);
```

> <!-- flesh this out more -->

Reviewer 2: I think it's particularly worth giving an overview here of the "rules of thumb" for how colors will now work in Sass. IIRC:

* Colors defined in one space stay in that space (and are emitted in that space) unless explicitly changed.
* You can always convert a color to widely-compatible sRGB format using ....
* Functions that work different ways in different spaces use the color's space by default but also have an explicit `$space` parameter.
* "Legacy colors" come from ... and are always emitted in a compatible format.

Also, list the new functions with brief documentation for each of them, list the functions that are being deprecated, and other such changes to the core modules.

### Design Decisions

Most of the design decisions involved in the proposal are based on the
[CSS Color Level 4][color-4] specification, which we have tried to emulate as
closely as possible, while maintaining support for legacy projects. In some
cases, that required major changes to the way Sass handles colors:

1. Channel values are no longer clamped to the gamut of a given color space.
   Authors can use the provided `to-gamut()` function to map colors into gamut,

>    or allow out-of-gamut colors in output. Browsers will also provide improved

Reviewer 2: I think "or allow" is a little confusing here, because it sounds like it's an explicit choice the author is making when (I believe) it's just the default. Maybe instead: "but by default Sass will emit out-of-gamut colors".

>    gamut mapping, based on the user device capabilities.

Reviewer 2: I would emphasize here that we don't clamp colors *because* browsers do better gamut-mapping than we possibly can.

> 2. Channel values are no longer rounded to the nearest integer, since the spec

Reviewer 2: I'd explicitly say "RGB channel values", since we never rounded HSL channel values.

   now requires maintaining precision wherever possible. This is especially
   important in RGB spaces, where color distribution is inconsistent.

While we are not attempting to support all of [CSS Color Level 5][color-5] at

> this point, we have used it as a reference while updating color manipulation

Reviewer 2: Probably worth mentioning that we aren't support Color 5 because it's not in browsers yet.

functions such as `color.mix()`.

[color-5]: https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-5/

<!-- flesh this out more -->

## Definitions

### Color

> Note that channel values are stored as specified, maintaining precision where

> > possible, even when the values are out-of-gamut for the given [color space][].

Reviewer 2: Nit: these days we leave off the trailing `[]` since it's not actually necessary.

A *color* is an object with several parts:

> * A string [*color space*](#color-space)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* A [*color space*](#color-space)
```

Defining this as "a string" is a bit confusing since a color space is already a well-defined object below.

> * An ordered list of *channel* values as defined by that [color space][].

Reviewer 2: These are always numbers, right?

Author: If we remove `none` from this proposal, then yes.

* A numeric *alpha* value which can be safely clamped in the `0-1` or `0%-100%`

>   range. Values outside that range are allowed, but meaningless.

Reviewer 2: For simplicity, let's just define this as a floating-point number from `0` to `1` inclusive and leave it up to functions to clamp it and convert from percentages.

> * A boolean *is-legacy* to indicate a [legacy color][].

Reviewer 2: You probably don't need to specify this given that you're defining Legacy Color below in terms of an exhaustive list of things that create them. An *implementation* will need to track this to know which colors are legacy, but that's not your concern here.

[legacy color]: #legacy-color
[color space]: #color-space

### Legacy Color

> Both Sass and CSS have similar legacy behavior that relies on all colors
> being interchangeable as part of a shared `srgb` color space. While the new
> color formats will opt users into new default behavior, some legacy color
> formats behave differently for the sake of backwards-compatibility.

Colors that are defined using the CSS color names, hex syntax, `rgb()`,
`rgba()`, `hsl()`, `hsla()`, or `hwb()` -- along with colors that result from

> legacy interpolation -- are considered *legacy colors*. All legacy colors are

Reviewer 2: It's not clear what "legacy interpolation" means here. Maybe instead say "colors returned by color functions whose  color inputs are all legacy"?

Alternatively, you could just say "or where otherwise specified", and list explicitly in the functions in question when they return a legacy color.

Reviewer 2: I'm realizing now that "colors returned by color functions whose color inputs are all legacy" doesn't work, because you don't want `color.to-space()` to return a legacy color if you convert to a color space that otherwise never supports legacy colors.

This raises another interesting question—is the *only* behavioral distinction between the `rgb` and `srgb` spaces that `rgb` can be legacy while `srgb` never can? Should that mean that we automatically change any non-legacy `rgb` color into `srgb`? Or should we just say that only `srgb` is an actual named color space, and it just may or may not be legacy?

Author: The two distinctions in CSS are:
- srgb is non-legacy
- srgb has higher precision requirements

For precision, there are actually a range of different 'minimum' requirements (https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color-4/#predefined-precision-table). But I assume on our end we just want to maintain whatever precision we can, consistent across all spaces. 

I did originally have us converting everything into srgb eagerly, but wondered if it would be confusing. I don't think there's any reason we can't do it - just that it changes what authors see when inspecting. (I suppose there's also a question about the output, since rgb and srgb have different browser support, and are treated differently in terms of the browser considering them legacy)

Reviewer 2: Maybe what we should do is keep the distinction, and then instead of saying "some colors are have a special legacy flag set" just say "the term *legacy color* is defined to mean a color in the color space `rgb`, `hsl`, or `hwb`".

in the `srgb` gamut. The output of a legacy color is not required to match the
input [color space][].

### Color Space

Every color is stored internally as part of a defined color space. Each space

> has a name, and an ordered list of associated channels that can be accessed and

Reviewer 2: We should also mention that channels can have names. Do they *always* have names? Or are they sometimes only defined by-position?

> manipulated in that space. Each channel value can be any number, or the keyword

Reviewer 2: "Any number" implies that it can have any units. Maybe we should say that each channel also has an associated unit as well that the value is required to match?

> `none`.

Reviewer 2: I thought we were leaving `none` out for now.

Author: As far as I can tell at this point, the [blocking issue](https://github.com/w3c/csswg-drafts/issues/7536) has been resolved well enough for us to implement - and we should do that in order to get conversion/interpolation results that match CSS.

Values outside a _bounded gamut_ range are valid, and remain un-clamped, but
are considered _out of gamut_ for the given color space. Unbounded channels
that accept both number and percentage values can still provide a reference

> range for mapping between the two value types. If the channel is bounded, or

Reviewer 2: IMO it's better to put the complexity of "some channels can take numbers *or* percentages" in Normalizing Color Channels rather than including it in the space definition itself. You can have that procedure detect which spaces allow percentages and then convert them into non-percent numbers.

has a reference range with a lower-boundary of zero, then the channel is
considered _scalable_.

> This follows the CSS specification, which defines percentage-mapping onto
> several channels that are technically unbounded. Note that some mappings
> have a lower boundary of `-100%` rather than `0`.

> Colors specified using a CSS color keyword, or the hex notation are converted

Reviewer 2: Nit:

```suggestion
Colors specified using a CSS color keyword or the hex notation are converted
```

to `rgb` and serialized as part of the `rgb` color space.

> The color spaces and their channels are:

Reviewer 2: What about unknown color spaces? How should we treat their channels?

If the answer is "we handle these separately in the color functions", maybe we should change this definition name to *Known* Color Spaces?

* `rgb` (RGB, legacy):
  * `red`, `green`, `blue`:
    * gamut: bounded

>     * number: [0,255]

Reviewer 2: These should probably be code-formatted

    * percentage: [0%,100%]

* `hwb` (RGB, legacy):

>   * `hue`: polar angle

Reviewer 2: This could use an explicit definition, even if it's one that's shared across multiple color spaces.

`srgb` gamut:

* `rgb`
* `srgb-linear`
* `hwb`
* `hsl`

All other color spaces describe unknown or theoretically infinite gamuts.

### Color Interpolation Method

<x><pre>
**ColorInterpolationMethod** ::= 'in' (
&#32;                                 RectangularColorSpace
&#32;                               | PolarColorSpace HueInterpolationMethod?
&#32;                             )
**RectangularColorSpace**    ::= 'srgb'
&#32;                          | 'srgb-linear'
&#32;                          | 'lab'
&#32;                          | 'oklab'
&#32;                          | 'xyz'
&#32;                          | 'xyz-d50'
&#32;                          | 'xyz-d65'
**PolarColorSpace**          ::= 'hsl'
&#32;                          | 'hwb'
&#32;                          | 'lch'
&#32;                          | 'oklch'
**HueInterpolationMethod**   ::= (
&#32;                                'shorter'
&#32;                              | 'longer'
&#32;                              | 'increasing'
&#32;                              | 'decreasing'
&#32;                              | 'specified'
&#32;                            ) 'hue'

> </pre></x>

Reviewer 2: Usually when we write out a BNF syntax definition like this, it's for something we parse from a file rather than from a SassScript value. It's okay to use it here, but you should explicitly mention that this matches a space-separated list of unquoted strings.

> Different color interpolation methods provide different advantages. For that
> reason, individual color procedures and functions (the host syntax) can
> establish their own color interpolation defaults, or provide a syntax for
> authors to explicitly choose the method that best fits their need.

The **host syntax** for a given interpolation procedure is the color syntax
or function that instigates that interpolation. When selecting a color
interpolation method:

* If the host syntax defines what method to use use, use the specified method.

* Otherwise, if all the colors involved are [legacy colors](#legacy-color),
  use `srgb`.

> * Otherwise, use `oklab`.

Reviewer 2: This section confuses me. It's not defining the term "color interpolation method"... it seems to be defining some sort of default interpolation method, but it doesn't actually give it a name.

Author: I think we can remove this entirely, and define the defaulting logic as needed for each process/function.

## Procedures

### Converting a Color

Colors can be converted from one [color space][] to another. Algorithms for
color conversion are defined in the [CSS Color Level 4][color-4]

> specification. Each algorithm takes a color `origin-color`, and a string

Reviewer 2: "a string" -> "a color space"?

`target-space`, and returns a color `output-color`.

> {% warn %}

Reviewer 2: This syntax isn't supported by GitHub-Flavored Markdown

* [LCH to Lab, OKLCH to OKLab](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#lch-to-lab)

* [Between predefined RGB spaces](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#predefined-to-predefined)

* [Any RGB to Lab/OKLab](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#predefined-to-lab-oklab)

* [Lab/OKLab to any RGB](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#oklab-lab-to-predefined)

> For additional details, see the [Sample code for color conversions][convert].

[convert]: https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#color-conversion-code

### Gamut Mapping

> Some [color spaces](#color-space) describe limited
> [color gamuts](#color-gamuts). If a color is 'out of gamut' for a particular
> space (most often because of conversion from a larger-gamut color-space), it
> can be useful to 'map' that color to the nearest available 'in-gamut' color.
> Gamut mapping is the process of finding an in-gamut color with the least
> objectionable change in visual appearance.

Gamut mapping in Sass follows the [CSS gamut mapping algorithm][css-mapping].
This procedure accepts a color `origin` in the color space `origin color space`,
and a destination color space `destination`. It returns the result of a

> [CSS gamut map](css-map) procedure, which is a color in the `destination` color

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[CSS gamut map][css-map] procedure, which is a color in the `destination` color
```

space.

> This algorithm implements a relative colorimetric intent, and colors inside
> the destination gamut are unchanged.

[css-mapping]: https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color/#css-gamut-mapping-algorithm
[css-map]: https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color/#css-gamut-map

### Parsing Color Components

This procedure accepts an `input` parameter to parse, along with a `space`

> parameter representing the [color space][], if known. It throws common parse

Reviewer 2: This suggests that `space` *is a* color space, but elsewhere in the procedure, it's treated as a plain string that may correspond to the *name of a* color space. I think we should be more explicit about when we're dealing with each of these and how to get from the name to an actual color space (and what that means if the name isn't a known color space).

errors if necessary, and returns either `null` (if the `input` contains special
CSS values), or a list of parsed and normalized values. The return value is in
the format `<color-space>? (<channel>+) / <alpha>`, where the color space is

> included in the return value if it was not passed in initially.

Reviewer 2: Would it be simpler to just say "this returns either `null` or three values: an optional color space, a list of channel numbers, and a floating-point alpha value"? There's no requirement that a procedure return a SassScript value unless it's being used *directly* in SassScript.

> This supports both the known color formats like `hsl()` and `rgb()`, where
> the space is determined by the function, as well as the syntax of `color()`,
> where the space is included as one of the input arguments (and may be a
> user-defined space).

The procedure is:

  * If `input` is a [special variable string][], return `null`.

>   * Let `include-space` be true if `space` is undefined, and false otherwise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * Let `include-space` be true if `space` is null, and false otherwise.
```

  * If `input` is a bracketed list, or a list with a separator other than
    'slash' or 'space', throw an error.

  * If `input` is a slash-separated list:

    * If `input` doesn't have exactly two elements, throw an error.

    * Otherwise, let `components` be the first element and `alpha` the second
      element of `input`.

  * Otherwise:

    * Let `components` be an unbracketed space separated list of all except the
      last element of `input`.

    * If the last element of `input` is an unquoted string that contains `/`:

      * Let `split-last` be the result calling `string.split()` with the last
        element of `input` as the string to split, and `/` as the separator.

      * If there are not two items in `split-last`, throw an error.

      * If either item in `split-last` can be coerced to a number, replace the
        current value of the item with the resulting number value.

      * Let `alpha` be the second element in `split-last`, and append the first
        element of `split-last` to `components`.

      > This solves for a legacy handling of `/` in Sass that would produce an

>       > unquoted string when the alpha value is a css function such as `var()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      > unquoted string when the alpha value is a CSS function such as `var()`
```

>       > or when either value is the keyword `none`.

Reviewer 2: If we drop "none" handling for now, we can just return `null` here, right?

    * Otherwise, if the last element of `input` has preserved its status as two
      slash-separated numbers:

      * Let `alpha` be the number after the slash, and append the number before
        the slash to `components`.

>     * Otherwise, append the last element of `input` to `components`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Otherwise, append the last element of `input` to `components`.
```

>   * If `components` is undefined or an empty list, throw an error.

Reviewer 2: Can `components` be undefined here? Doesn't it get assigned in both branches?

Reviewer 3: it indeed seems always assigned

  * If `components` is a [special variable string][]:

    * Let `channels` be the value of `components`.

  * Otherwise:

    * If `components` is not an unbracketed space-separated list, throw an error.

>     * If `space` is undefined, let `space` be the first element in `components`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * If `space` is null, let `space` be the first element in `components`,
```

      and let `channels` be an unbracketed space-separated list with the
      remaining elements from `components`.

    * Otherwise, let `channels` be the value of `components`.

>     * If `space` is not a string, throw an error.

Reviewer 2: Do you intend to allow this to be quoted or unquoted? Or are both allowed?

    * Let `expected` be the number of channels in `space` if `space` is a known
      [color-space][], and null otherwise.

    * If `expected` is not null, and `channels` has more than `expected`

>       elements, throw an error.

Reviewer 2: I think you can omit this, because you check it again on line 607.

  * Otherwise, let `parsed` be the value of `normal`.

  * Return an unbracketed slash-separated list with `parsed` as the first
    element, and `alpha` as the second.

    > This results in valid CSS color-value output, while also grouping
    > space, channels, and alpha as separate elements in nested lists.
    > Alternately, we could allow `parsed` to be a single flat list, even
    > when the color-space is included?

[special variable string]: ../spec/functions.md#special-variable-string
[special number string]: ../spec/functions.md#special-number-string
[percent-converting]: #percent-converting-a-number

### Normalizing Color Channels

[normalizing]: #normalizing-color-channels

This process accepts an ordered list `channels` to validate, and a string
`space` to normalize against. It throws an error if any channel is invalid for
the [color space][] `space`, or returns a normalized list of valid channels.

* Let `normal` be an empty list.

* For each `channel` in `channels`:

  * If `channel` is not a number or the keyword `'none'`, throw an error.

  * If `channel` is the keyword `'none'`, append `channel` as the next item in
    `normal`.

  * Otherwise:

>     * Let `valid` be the corresponding channel defined by the [color space][]

Reviewer 2: We should probably mention in the color space definition that the channel order is significant.

      `space`.

    * If `valid` is a polar-angle `hue`:

>       * Let `normal-channel` be the result converting `channel` to `deg`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      * Let `normal-channel` be the result of converting `channel` to `deg`
```

        allowing unitless.

      * Append `normal-channel` as the next item in `normal`.

      > Normalizing the result into a half-open range of `[0,360)` would be a
      > lossy transformation, since some forms of [hue interpolation][hue-method]
      > require the specified hue values.

    * Otherwise:

>       * If `channel` is a number with units other than `%`, throw an error.

Reviewer 2: What if an unknown color space uses polar coordinates and so could accept `deg` etc? Is that allowed by the CSS spec?

Author: Clarifying that normalization requires a known color space…

      * If `valid` requires a percentage, and `channel` is a number without

>         units, throw an error.

Reviewer 2: Nit: we usually just say "unitless number"

      * Append `channel` as the next item in `normal`.

* Return `normal`.

> ### Interpolating Colors

Reviewer 2: It might be good to have a non-normative link to the CSS spec here.

This procedure accepts two color arguments (`color1` and `color2`), a
[color interpolation method][] `method`, and a percentage `weight` for `color1`
in the mix. It returns a new color `mix` that represents the appropriate mix of
input colors.

* If either `color1` or `color2` is not a color, throw an error.

> * If `weight` is undefined, set `weight` to `50%`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If `weight` is null, set `weight` to `50%`.
```

* Set `weight` to the result of [percent-converting][] `weight` with a max of 1.

> * If `method` is undefined, throw an error.

Reviewer 2: Can we just assume that any caller will pass in a method here?

* Otherwise:

  * If `method` is not a [color interpolation method][color-method], throw an
    error.

>   * Let `space` be the [color space][] specified in `method`.

Reviewer 2: In the definition for Color Interpolation Method, you should explicitly specify how to determine "the color space". It's probably clear to a human that it's the space whose name is given by the `PolarColorSpace` or `RectangularColorSpace` productions, but that's not currently explicitly stated anywhere.

  * If `space` is a [PolarColorSpace][color-method]:

    * Let `hue-arc` be the `HueInterpolationMethod` specified in `method`, or
      `shorter` if no hue interpolation is specified.

* For each `color` of `color1` and `color2`:

  * Set `color` to the results of [converting][] `color` into `space`.

  * If any `component` of `color` is `none`, set that `component` to the value
    of the corresponding component in the other color.

    > If both values are `none`, the interpolation result for that component
    > will also be `none`.

  * Set `color` to the result of [premultiplying] `color`.

* Let `mix` be a new color in the `space` [color space][], with `none` for
  alpha and all channel values.

* For each `channel` of `mix`:

  * Let `channel1` and `channel2` be the corresponding channel values in
    `color1` and `color2` respectively.

  * If `channel` represents a hue angle, set `channel1` and `channel2`
    respectively to the results of [hue interpolation][hue-method] with
    `channel1` as `hue1`, `channel2` as `hue2`, using the `hue-arc` method.

  * Set `channel` to the result of calculating

>     `(channel1 * weight) + (channel2 * (1 - weight))`.

Reviewer 2: Currently, some channels can have *either* absolute or percentage-based values for the same channel, which will break this logic. That'll be mitigated somewhat if you get rid of percentages in Normalizing Color Channels, but that still leaves the question of unknown color spaces. What does `color.mix(color(unknown 10), color(unknown 50%))` return?

(Obviously the practical answer has to be "it throws an error" at some point, but I don't think that's specified anywhere right now.)

    > Channel rounding has been removed, since it is a lossy transform.

* Return `mix`.

[premultiplying]: #premultiply-transparent-colors
[un-premultiplying]: #premultiply-transparent-colors
[color-method]: #color-interpolation-method
[hue-method]: #hue-interpolation
[converting]: #converting-a-color

#### Premultiply Transparent Colors

When the colors being interpolated are not fully opaque, they are transformed
into premultiplied color values. This process accepts a single `color` and
updates the channel values if necessary, returning a new color with
premultiplied channels.

* If the `color` has an `alpha` value of 1, return `color` unchanged.

* Otherwise, for each `channel` in `color`:

>   * If either the `alpha` value, or the `channel` value is `none`, or the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * If either the `alpha` value or the `channel` value is `none`, or the
```

    `channel` represents a polar-angle `hue`, keep the original value of
    `channel`.

  * Otherwise, set `channel` to the result of multiplying the `channel` value

>     by the `alpha` value.

Reviewer 2: I mentioned this offline, but this seems like it would just make the resulting color darker, which doesn't seem right

Author: I was missing a step here where the results need to have the channel values un-multiplied - so the darkening effect is removed.

* Return the resulting `color` with premultiplied channels.

The same process can be run in reverse, to **un-premultiply** the channels of a
given `color`:

* If the `color` has an `alpha` value of 1, return `color` unchanged.

* Otherwise, for each `channel` in `color`:

  * If either the `alpha` value, or the `channel` value is 0 or `none`, or the
    `channel` represents a polar-angle `hue`, keep the original value of
    `channel`.

  * Otherwise, set `channel` to the result of dividing the premultiplied
    `channel` value by the `alpha` value.

* Return the resulting `color` with un-premultiplied channels.

#### Hue Interpolation

> When interpolating between polar-angle hue channels, there are multiple
> 'directions' the interpolation could move, following different logical rules.

This process accepts two hue angles (`hue1` and `hue2`), and returns both hues
adjusted according to the given `method`. When no hue interpolation `method` is
specified, the default is `shorter`.

The process for each [hue interpolation method][hue-interpolation] is defined
in [CSS Color Level 4][color-4]. If the `method` is not the value

> `'specified'`, both angles need to be constrained to `[0, 360)` prior to

Reviewer 2: "constrained to" could be read as "clamped to"—it might be a good idea to explicitly say that they're set to `angle % 360deg`

interpolation.

* [shorter](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#shorter)

* [longer](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#hue-longer)

* [increasing](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#increasing)

* [decreasing](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#decreasing)

* [specified](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#hue-specified)

[hue-interpolation]: https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#hue-interpolation

> ## Deprecated Functions

Reviewer 2: Should we also take this opportunity to deprecate the global `saturate()`, `transparentize()`, etc functions, since none of them are getting the fancy new color space logic?

Author: Yes. Should that also include the global versions of functions that we are updating, like `adjust-color()`?

Individual color-channel functions defined globally or in the color module are
deprecated in favor of the new `color.channel()` function. That includes:

* `color.red()`/`red()`
* `color.green()`/`green()`
* `color.blue()`/`blue()`
* `color.hue()`/`hue()`
* `color.saturation()`/`saturation()`
* `color.lightness()`/`lightness()`
* `color.whiteness()`
* `color.blackness()`

While deprecated, if the specified color argument is not a [legacy color][],
throw an error.

## New Color Module Functions

These new functions are part of the built-in `sass:color` module.

### `color.space()`

* ```
  space($color)
  ```

  * If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

>   * Return a quoted string with the name of `$color`s associated

Reviewer 2: While we do typically try to return quoted strings from Sass functions, I wonder if this should potentially be unquoted because that's what the `color()` function expects.

    [color space][].

### `color.to-space()`

* ```
  to-space($color, $space)
  ```

  * If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

>   * Let `origin-space` be the result of calling `space($color)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Let `origin-space` be the result of calling `color.space($color)`.
```

To match the typical user experience (and read a bit more like a sentence), we usually write out the namespaces of core functions we invoke.

>   * If `origin-space` equals-equals `$space`, return `$color`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * If `origin-space == $space`, return `$color`.
```

    > This allows unknown spaces, as long as they match the origin space.

  * If `$space` is not a [color space][], throw an error.

>   * Return the result of [converting][] the `origin-color`

Reviewer 3: I think this misses an error for the case where `$space` or `origin-space` are unknown spaces, because the current conversion algorithm only supports known spaces.

    `$color` to the `target-space` `$space`.

### `color.is-legacy()`

* ```
  is-legacy($color)
  ```

  * If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

  * Return `true` if `$color` is a [legacy color][], or `false`
    otherwise.

### `color.is-powerless()`

* ```

>   is-powerless($color, $channel, $space)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  is-powerless($color, $channel, $space: null)
```

Like when defining a function in Sass, you need to explicitly mention when a parameter is optional and what its default value is. Similar in other functions below.

  ```

  * If `$color` is not a valid color, throw an error.

  * If `$space` is null:

>     * Let `color` be the value of `color`, and let `space` be the result of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Let `color` be `$color`, and let `space` be the result of
```

>       calling `space($color)`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
      calling `color.space($color)`.
```

  * Otherwise:

    * Let `color` be the result of calling `to-space($color, $space)`, and let
      `space` be the value of `$space`.

>   * If `$channel` is not the name of a channel in the color-space `space`,

Reviewer 3: This should probably also include an error if `space` is not a known color space.

    throw an error.

  * Return `true` if the channel `$channel` is [powerless](#powerless-components)
    in `color`, otherwise return `false`.

### `color.is-in-gamut()`

* ```
  is-in-gamut($color, $space)
  ```

  * If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

  * Let `space` be the value of `$space` if specified, or the result of calling
    `space($color)` otherwise.

  * If `space` is not a valid [color space][], throw an error.

  * Let `gamut` be the [color gamut](#color-gamuts) associated with `space`

>     if an association is defined, or the value of `space` otherwise.

Reviewer 2: This seems unused.

  * Let `color` be the result of calling `to-space($color, space)`.

  * For all bounded channels in `space`, if the associated channel value in
    `$color` is outside the bounded range, return `false`.

  * Otherwise, return `true`.

### `color.to-gamut()`

* ```
  to-gamut($color, $space)
  ```

  * If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

  * Let `origin-space` be the result of calling `space($color)` otherwise.

  * Let `target-space` be the value of `$space` if specified, or the value of
    `origin-space` otherwise.

>   * If `target-space` is not a valid [color space][], throw an error.

Reviewer 3: is `valid color space` here meant to mean `known color space` ?

  * Return the result of [gamut mapping][] with `$color` as the
    origin color, `origin-space` as the origin color space, and
    `target-space` as the destination color space.

[gamut mapping]: #gamut-mapping

### `color.channel()`

> Note that channel values are stored as specified, even if those values are
> out-of-gamut for the [color space][] used. Similarly, this color-channel
> inspection function may return out-of-gamut channel values.

* ```
  channel($color, $channel, $space)
  ```

  * If `$space` is null:

    * Let `space` be the result of calling `space($color)`, and let `color` be
      the value of `$color`.

  * Otherwise:

    * Let `color` be the result of calling `to-space($color, $space)`, and let
      `space` be the value of `$space`.

  * If `space` is a known [color space][], let `channels` be a map of channel
    names defined for `space`, and their corresponding values in `color`, or a
    map with 1-indexed number keys and their corresponding values in `color`

>     otherwise.

Reviewer 2: This is a bit confusing. It's unclear if we create a map with number keys *only* for unknown spaces or also for known spaces, and if it's the latter it seems like this is predicting the future by asking for a map that "just works" for the `map.get()` call below.

It might be clearer to always create a map with 1-indexed number keys, then also add channel-name keys if `space` is known.

  * Let `value` be the result of calling `map.get(channels, $channel)`.

  * If `value` is `null`, throw an error.

  * Otherwise, return `value`.

## Modified Color Module Functions

### `color.hwb()`

These functions are now deprecated. Authors should use global `hwb()` instead.

> Channel clamping and scaling have been removed from the global function,
> since we now allow out-of-gamut color-channels to be stored as specified.

* ```
  hwb($channels)
  ```

>   This function is available as a global function named `hwb()`.

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to add a new overload here when it'll be instantly deprecated?

Author: The `color.hwb($channels)` function already exists (https://sass-lang.com/documentation/modules/color#hwb) so I wasn't intending to add anything new here - only redirect to the appropriate version while deprecating. Would that be better written as a call to the global, rather than an overload?

```css
  * Return the result of calling the global function `hwb($channels)`.
```

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I think it's a bit confusing to say that only one overload of a function is available as a global—explicitly having a "calls" relationship between them makes more sense to me.

* ```
  hwb($hue, $whiteness, $blackness, $alpha: 1)
  ```

  * Return the result of calling the global function
    `hwb($hue $whiteness $blackness / $alpha)`.

### `color.mix()`

```
mix($color1, $color2,
  $weight: 50%,
  $method: null)
```

> * If `$method` undefined:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If `$method` is undefined:
```

>   * If `$color1` and `$color2` are both legacy colors, let `method` be `rgb`.

Reviewer 2: We should be *very* confident that this matches the old `mix()` behavior. As specified currently, I believe it does not.

  * Otherwise, throw an error.

    > Method is required for non-legacy colors. This matches the `color-mix()`
    > function defined in [Colors Level 5][color-5], and allows us to add
    > additional default behavior in the future.

* Otherwise:

  * If `method` is not a [color interpolation method][color-method], throw an
    error.

>   * Let `method` be the value of `$method`.

Reviewer 2: You don't really need this line; you can just refer to `$method` directly.

  * Let `space` be the [color space][] specified in `method`.

> * If `space` is one of 'hsl' or 'hwb':

Reviewer 2: The term "is" is squishy. Does it consider quoted strings equivalent to unquoted ones? Are the values you're comparing against quoted or unquoted to begin with? It's often clearer to write in SassScript snippets, like "If `space == hsl or space == hwb`" or "If `space` is unquoted and `space == hsl or space == hwb`"

  * Let `color1` and `color2` be the result of [converting][] and
    [gamut mapping][] `$color1` and `$color2` respectively into `space`.

>   > These color spaces are unable to express colors outside the `srgb` gamut.

Reviewer 2: Why is this? Aren't even bounded colors allowed to exceed their bounds? If these color spaces uniquely can't do so, should we still eagerly clamp them?

* Otherwise, let `color1` and `color2` be the result of [converting][]
  `$color1` and `$color2` respectively into `space`.

* Return the result of [interpolating](#interpolating-colors) between `color1`
  and `color2` with the specified `$weight` and `method`.

### `color.alpha()`

* ```
  alpha($color)
  ```

  * If `$color` is not a color, call the other overload and return its result.

  * Return the alpha channel of `$color` as a unitless number.

* ```
  alpha($args...)
  ```

  > This overload exists to support Microsoft's proprietary [`alpha()`

>   > function][].

Reviewer 3: shouldn't we deprecate that overload in the namespaced function ?

Author: For now, I've removed this entire `alpha()` section based on Natalie's comments above, since it doesn't make any changes. Not sure if we want to add a special mention of this overload in the deprecations section?

  [`alpha()` function]: https://blogs.msdn.microsoft.com/ie/2010/08/17/ie9-opacity-and-alpha/

  * If `$args` is empty, throw an error.

  * If `$args` has any keyword arguments, throw an error.

  * Unless all arguments of `$args` are unquoted strings that begin with a
    sequence of ASCII letters, followed by one or more spaces, followed by `=`
    throw an error.

  * Return a plain CSS function string with the name `"alpha"` and the arguments
    `$args`.

> 

Reviewer 2: Does this actually change anything? Do you need to redefine this?

### `color.change()`

```
change($color, $args...)
```

This function is also available as a global function named `change-color()`.

* If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

* If any item in `$args` is not a keyword argument, throw an error.

* Let `space` be `$color`'s [color space][].

* If the keyword argument `$space` is specified in `$args`:

    * If `$space` is not a known [color space][], throw an error.

    * Set `space` to the value of `$space`.

    * Let `color` be the result of [converting][] `$color` to `space`.

* Otherwise, let `color` be the value of `$color`.

* Let `legacy` be `true` if `$color` is a legacy color and `space` is a
  legacy color space, and `false` otherwise.

* Let `alpha` be `color`'s alpha property.

* If the keyword argument `$alpha` is specified in `$args`:

    * If `$alpha` is not a unitless number between `-1` and `1` (inclusive),
      throw an error.

>     * Set `alpha` to the value of `$alpha + alpha` clamped between 0 and 1.

Reviewer 2: This is the logic for `color.adjust()`—`color.change()` just sets a new value entirely.

* Let `channel-args` be the remaining keyword arguments in `$args`, not
  including `$space` or `$alpha` arguments.

* Let `channels` be a list of the `color`'s channels.

* For each keyword `new` in `channel-args`:

>   * If `new` is not the name of a channel in `channels`, throw an error.

Reviewer 2: Currently, this doesn't provide any way to work with unknown color spaces. That's not a big deal for now, but something to ponder for a potential future proposal.

Author: Generally we've been allowing access to unknown channels using their index. In this case, that would require something like `color.change($color, $1: 0.25)`, but `$1` is not a valid arg name. I'm open to ideas here. I could imagine something like:

```scss
// allow passing a map of index/value pairs
color.change($color, $by-index: (1: 0.25))
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe `color.change($color, $channel1: 0.25)`?

* If the keyword argument `$alpha` is specified in `$args`:

    * If `$alpha` is not a unitless number between `-1` and `1` (inclusive),
      throw an error.

    * Set `alpha` to the result of [scaling][] `alpha` by `$alpha` with `max` 1,
      treating any `'none'` keyword as a value of `0`.

* Let `channel-args` be the remaining keyword arguments in `$args`, not
  including `$space` or `$alpha` arguments.

* Let `channels` be a list of the `color`'s channels.

* For each keyword `scale` in `channel-args`:

  * If `scale` is not the name of a bounded or percentage-mapped channel in
    `channels`, throw an error.

  * Set the corresponding `channel` in `channels` to the result of [scaling][]
    `channel` by `scale` with a `max` defined by the channel boundary.

* Let `normal` be the result of [normalizing][] `channels`.

* Return a color in the `space` [color space][], with `normal` channels, an
  alpha value of `alpha`, and a legacy value of `legacy`.

### `color.complement()`

```
complement($color, $space)
```

This function is also available as a global function named `complement()`.

* If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

> * If `$space` is undefined:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If `$space` is null:
```

"Undefined" isn't a well-defined value in SassScript.

  * If `$color` is a legacy color, let `space` be `hsl`.

  * Otherwise, throw an error.

* Otherwise:

  * If `$space` is not a [color space][] with a polar-angle hue channel, throw
    an error.

    > This currently allows `hsl`, `hwb`, `lch`, and `oklch`. We could also
    > map some cubic spaces with matching gamuts e.g. (`oklab` -> `oklch`),

>     > but that adds implicit complexity, while still excluding color spaces.

Reviewer 2: It looks like we *do* do this mapping for `color.invert()`—either way we should be consistent.

  * Let `space` be the value of `$space`.

* Return the result of calling `color.adjust()` with `$color`, a $hue of

>   `180deg`, and a $space of `space`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Return the result of calling `color.adjust($color, $hue: 180deg, $space: space)`.
```

You don't have to use prose when it gets in the way :-). Similarly elswhere.

### `color.invert()`

```

> invert($color, $space)

Reviewer 2: The existing `color.invert()` function also supports a `$weight` parameter (which it just tosses into `$mix` at the end).

```

This function is also available as a global function named `invert()`.

* If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

> * If `$space` is undefined:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If `$space` is null:
```

>   * If `$color` is a legacy color, let `space` be `hsl`.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be `rgb` to match the current behavior?

  * Otherwise, throw an error.

* Otherwise:

  * If `$space` is not a [color space][], throw an error.

  * If `$space` is 'xyz', 'xyz-d50', or 'xyz-d65', throw an error.

    > It might be possible to define these inversions, but I'm not clear on
    > the algorithm at this point.

  * If `$space` is 'lab', let `space` be `lch`.

>   * Otherwise, if `$space` is 'oklab', let `space` be `oklch`.

Reviewer 3: there is a mix between quotes and backticks around color space names here.

  * Otherwise, let `space` be the value of `$space`.

* Let `color` be the result of [converting][] and [gamut mapping][] `$color`
  into the color space `space`.

* If `space` is a color space with a lightness channel and polar-angle hue:

  * Let `light` be the value of `color`'s lightness channel as a percentage,
    and let `hue` be be the value of `color`'s hue channel.

  * Let `light-output` be the result of `100% - light`.

  * Let `hue-output` be the result of `(hue + 180deg) % 360deg`.

  * Let `invert` be the result of calling `color.change()` with `color`, a $hue
    argument of `hue-output`, and a lightness of `light-output`.

  * If `$space` is defined and not equal to `space`, return the result of
    [converting][] `color` into `$space`.

    > This only applies to `lab`/`oklab` and `lch`/`oklch` pairings.

  * Otherwise, return `color`.

* Otherwise, if `space` is 'hwb':

  * Let `hue`, `whiteness` and `blackness` be the three elements of `color`'s
    channels.

  * Let `hue-output` be the result of `(hue + 180deg) % 360deg`.

  * Let `gray` be the result of `whiteness + blackness`.

  * Return the result of calling `color.change()` with `color`, a $hue of `hue`,

>     $whiteness of `gray - whiteness`, and $blackness of `gray - blackness`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    $whiteness of `gray - whiteness`, and `$blackness` of `gray - blackness`.
```

  * [`color.hwb()`](#colorhwb)
  * [`color.mix()`](#colormix)
  * [`color.change()`](#colorchange)
  * [`color.adjust()`](#coloradjust)
  * [`color.scale()`](#colorscale)
  * [`color.complement()`](#colorcomplement)
  * [`color.invert()`](#colorinvert)
  * [`color.grayscale()`](#colorgrayscale)
  * [`color.ie-hex-str()`](#colorie-hex-str)
* [New Global Functions](#new-global-functions)
  * [`hwb()`](#hwb)
  * [`lab()`](#lab)
  * [`lch()`](#lch)
  * [`oklab()`](#oklab)
  * [`oklch()`](#oklch)
  * [`color()`](#color)
* [Modified Global Functions](#modified-global-functions)
  * [`rgb()` and `rgba()`](#rgb-and-rgba)
  * [`hsl()` and `hsla()`](#hsl-and-hsla)

## Background

> This section is non-normative.

When working with color on the web, there are a few important terms:

- A *color model* is a mathematical approach to representing colors and their
  relationships. Historically, RGB has been the dominant color model for both
  computer monitors and web browsers. Lately, CIELab and OKLab models have
  shown significant benefits by providing a more *perceptually uniform*
  distribution of colors, so that similar mathematical adjustments achieve
  visually similar results.

> - A *color space* is the result of projecting a color model into a coordinate

Reviewer 3: Those definitions look weird to me. What you call a "color model" here is exactly what the CSS spec calls a "color space". Color spaces are `sRGB`, `CIE Lab` and `OKLab`, not `RGB` or `HSL`. What you call a color space here is called a coordinate system of the color space in the CSS spec.
I think we should align the terminology to avoid confusion.

Reviewer 3: Reading more in details, I think there is a confusion in the CSS spec between the terminology defined at the beginning of the spec and the the `<color-space>` production in the defined syntax.

Author: Yeah, I can try to make some clarifications here, but I think we're technically aligned with the spec already. 

To some extent it's just a problem of confusing and overlapping terms. OKLab & RGB are both color models, and also color spaces (which means they are also coordinate systems). The CSS spec doesn't define _color model_ as a term, they only reference it in the color space term definition. I think the CSS spec is also a bit inconsistent about when they say 'color space' and when they say 'coordinate system'. 

Both of us are also blurring 'color space' with 'color function' a bit, since they're _mostly_ one-to-one, and defining them that way is easier to explain to authors. But that gets a bit tangled, since `rgb` and `srgb` are technically the same space, just using legacy and non-legacy functions. There's no reason for CSS to provide both as part of a `<color-space>` production for 'color interpolation method', but it is useful for us to distinguish between them as a way of tracking legacy vs non-legacy colors. By keeping `rgb` as a distinct space, we no longer need the `is-legacy` boolean.

The other confusion here is that we used non-overlapping examples for an overlapping concept. In my definition, I used legacy function examples for color spaces (rgb and hsl). In their definition examples, they used only color spaces in the `color()` function. Both are accurate. Both `srgb` and `hsl` are color spaces.

- A *color space* is the result of projecting a color model into a coordinate
  system. In CSS, each color syntax describes a specific (and often unique)
  color space. For example, `rgb()`, `color(srgb)`, and `color(display-p3)` all
  project the RGB color model into cubic coordinate systems, while `hsl()`
  projects the same color model into a cylindrical (polar-angle) space.
  Similarly, `oklab()` and `oklch()` provide different coordinate projections
  of the OKLab model.
- A *color gamut* is the full range of colors that can be described in a color
  space. Historically, all CSS syntaxes have been limited to the sRGB gamut.
  However, modern computer monitors often support wider gamuts. Color spaces
  like `srgb` and `display-p3` describe different gamuts of color, using the
  same underlying RGB color model, and differently-mapped cubic coordinates.

These terms can get a bit confusing, since there is so much overlap. The term
'RGB' can refer to a color model, a color space, a coordinate system, and also
a color function. The 'RGB' color space is identical to the 'sRGB' space, and
both describe the 'sRGB' gamut. But we have both `rgb()` and `color(srgb)`

> syntax, in order to distinguish legacy from non-legacy variations. Some new

Reviewer 2: Might also be worth mentioning that RGB and sRGB have different coordinate systems, since RGB goes from 0-255 and sRGB goes from 0-1.

the sRGB gamut, Sass has historically treated all color formats and spaces as
interchangeable. That has allowed authors to inspect and manipulate colors in
any space, without careful management or gamut mapping. It has also allowed
Sass to output the most browser-compatible CSS format for any given color.

In order to support the color spaces in CSS, Sass will need to start tracking
the space/gamut associated with any given color, and provide author tools for
managing those color spaces/gamuts. In addition to supporting the new color
space functions, we plan to update all functions in the color module, and
provide some additional space and gamut management and inspection functions.

## Summary

> This section is non-normative.

This proposal defines Sassified versions of all the color functions in
[CSS Color Level 4][color-4]. Since the CIE color space defines the entire
gamut of visible color, much larger than the target sRGB gamut, out-of-range
color definitions will be clipped using a *relative-colorimetric* approach that
leaves in-gamut colors unaffected.

There are several rules of thumb for working with color spaces in Sass:

> - The `rgb`, `hsl`, and `hwb` spaces are considered 'legacy spaces', and will

Reviewer 2: Nit: this would be more readable in plain-text form with empty lines between the list elements.

  often get special handling for the sake of backwards compatibility. Colors
  defined using hex notation or CSS color names are considered part of the
  `rgb` color space. Legacy colors are emitted in the most compatible format.
- Otherwise, any color defined in a given space will remain in that space, and
  be emitted in that space.
- Authors can explicitly convert a color's space by using `color.to-space()`.
  This can be useful to enforce non-legacy behavior, by converting into a
  non-legacy space, or to ensure the color output is compatible with older
  browsers by converting colors into a legacy space before emitting.
- The `srgb` color space is equivalent to `rgb`, except that one is a legacy

>   space, and the other is not.

Reviewer 2: Also the coordinate systems!

- Color functions that allow specifying a color space for manipulation will
  always use the source color space by default. When an explicit space is
  provided for manipulation, the resulting color will still be returned in the
  same space as the origin color. For `color.mix()`, the first color parameter
  is considered the origin color.

> - All legacy and RGB spaces represent bounded gamuts of color. When converting (

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we can find a better term than "RGB spaces", since a naive reader will probably assume it means either "the `rgb` color space" or "the `rgb` or `srgb` color spaces". Maybe "RGB-style spaces"?

> - All legacy and RGB spaces represent bounded gamuts of color. When converting (

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- All legacy and RGB spaces represent bounded gamuts of color. When converting
```

  colors into a bounded gamut space, out-of-gamut channel values are maintained
  whenever possible. The only exception is that `hsl` and `hwb` color spaces
  are not able to express out-of-gamut color, so converting colors into those

>   spaces will require gamut-mapping.

Reviewer 2: "will require gamut-mapping" doesn't make it clear whose responsibility the gamut-mapping is. I'd say instead "will always gamut-map the colors" to make it clear that Sass does the gamut-mapping.

- Mapping colors into a gamut is a lossy process. Whenever possible, it should
  be left to the browser, which can map colors based on a given user's display
  capabilities. However, authors can perform explicit gamut mapping with the
  `color.to-gamut()` function.
- Legacy browsers require colors in the `srgb` gamut. However, most modern
  displays support the wider `display-p3` gamut.

The `oklab()` (cubic) and `oklch()` (cylindrical) functions provide access to

> an unbounded gamut of colors in perceptually uniform space. Authors can use

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
an unbounded gamut of colors in a perceptually uniform space. Authors can use
```

$blue: oklch(64% 0.196 253); // hsl(207.4 99.22% 50.69%)
```

The `oklch()` format uses consistent 'lightness' and 'chroma' values, while the
`hsl()` format shows dramatic changes in both 'lightness' and 'saturation'.
As such, `oklch` is often the best space for consistent transforms.

The new `color()` function provides access to a number of specialty spaces.
Most notably, `display-p3` is a common space for wide-gamut monitors, making
it likely one of the more popular options for authors who simply want access to
a wider range of colors. For example, P3 greens are significantly 'brighter'
and more saturated than the greens available in sRGB:

```scss
$fallback-green: rgb(0% 100% 0%);
$brighter-green: color(display-p3 0 1 0);
```

By default, all Sass color transformations are handled and returned in the
color space of the original color parameter. However, all relevant functions
now allow specifying an explicit color space for transformations. For example,
lightness & darkness adjustments are most reliable in `oklch`:

```scss
$brand: hsl(0 100% 25.1%);

// result: hsl(0 100% 50.1%)
$hsl-lightness: color.adjust($brand, $lightness: 25%);

// result: hsl(6.57 61.7% 57.2%)

> $oklch-lightness: color.adjust($brand, $lightness: 25%, $space: oklch);

Reviewer 2: I think we should use `color.scale()` here, since it generally has better perceptual properties than `color.adjust()` in and of itself.

```

Note that the returned color is still emitted in the original color space, even
when the adjustment is performed in a different space.

### Design Decisions

Most of the design decisions involved in the proposal are based on the
[CSS Color Level 4][color-4] specification, which we have tried to emulate as
closely as possible, while maintaining support for legacy projects. In some
cases, that required major changes to the way Sass handles colors:

1. RGB channel values are no longer clamped to the gamut of a color space,
   except for the `hsl` and `hwb` spaces, which are unable to represent
   out-of-gamut colors. By default Sass will output CSS with out-of-gamut
   colors, because browsers can provide better gamut mapping based on the user
   device capabilities. However, authors can use the provided `color.to-gamut()`
   function to enforce mapping a color into a specific gamut.
2. RGB channel values are no longer rounded to the nearest integer, since the
   spec now requires maintaining precision wherever possible. This is

>    especially important in RGB spaces, where color distribution is inconsistent.

Reviewer 2: "RGB-style spaces"?

We are not attempting to support all of [CSS Color Level 5][color-5] at this
point, since it is not yet implemented in browsers. However, we have used it as
a reference while updating color manipulation functions such as `color.mix()`.

[color-5]: https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-5/

Different color spaces often represent different color-gamuts, which can present
a new set of problems for authors. Some color manipulations are best handled
in a wide-gamut space like `oklch`, but then need to be mapped back to a
narrower gamut like `srgb` for legacy browsers. We established the following

> guidelines for color conversion and mapping in Sass color functions:

Reviewer 2: Might be worth explicitly mentioning that this is an intentional tradeoff to make the medium-term use-case of "supporting existing browsers" much nicer in exchange for having behavior that's potentially less desirable for the future when Color 4 is widely supported; but that we think this is worth it, particularly because in that future users are much less likely to want to use legacy color spaces in the first place, and out-of-gamut colors will be handled gracefully by future browsers.

* Every color function returns a color in the same space as the original color,
  no matter what space was used for transformations. The only exception is
  `color.to-space()`, which can be used for manual space conversion. Functions
  that accept two colors (e.g. `color.mix()`) return a color in the same space
  as the first color argument.
* No color function performs gamut-mapping on out-of-gamut channels, except
  `color.to-gamut()`, which can be used for manual gamut-mapping.

Unfortunately, the legacy `hsl` and `hwb` color spaces are not able to express
out-of-gamut colors, even with out-of-range channel values, so any conversion
into those spaces (using `color.to-gamut()` or manipulating colors in those
spaces) must always require gamut-mapping into the `srgb` gamut. This is
defined as part of the [CSS Color Level 4][color-4] specification for
[converting] colors.

## Definitions

### Color

> Note that channel values are stored as specified, maintaining precision where
> possible, even when the values are out-of-gamut for the [known color space].

A *color* is an object with several parts:

* A *color space* that is either a [known color space] or an unquoted string.

> * An ordered list of numeric *channel* values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* An ordered list of floating-point *channel* values.
```

Just to be absolutely clear that these are floats and not Sass numbers; which is to say, they can't have units.

> * An ordered list of numeric *channel* values.

Reviewer 2: Also a good idea to mention that any channel may also have the special value `none`.

* A floating-point number *alpha* value between `0-1`, inclusive.

  > While it's valid to specify numbers outside this range, they are
  > meaningless, and can be clamped by input functions when generating a color.

[known color space]: #known-color-space

### Legacy Color

> Both Sass and CSS have similar legacy behavior that relies on all colors
> being interchangeable as part of a shared `srgb` color space. While the new
> color formats will opt users into new default behavior, some legacy color

> > formats behave differently for the sake of backwards-compatibility.

Reviewer 2: "formats" -> "spaces" would be clearer here I think

Colors in the `rgb`, `hsl`, or `hwb` [color spaces](#known-color-space) are
considered *legacy colors*. The output of a legacy color is not required to
match the input color space, and several color functions maintain legacy
behavior when manipulating legacy colors.

> This includes colors defined using the CSS color names, hex syntax, `rgb()`,
> `rgba()`, `hsl()`, `hsla()`, or `hwb()` -- along with colors that are
> manually converted into legacy color spaces.

### Known Color Space

> Sass colors are stored as part of a known color space. Each space has a name

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what this first sentence means. It might be better to just omit it entirely; it's not really part of the definition of a color space, it's just an indication of how it's used.

and an ordered list of associated channels. Each channel has a name and
position index (1-indexed) defined by the space and the order of channels in
that space, and a number value with units matching those allowed by the space.
Space and channel names match unquoted strings, ignoring case. They are always
emitted as unquoted lowercase strings by inspection functions.

Values outside a _bounded gamut_ range are valid, and remain un-clamped, but
are considered _out of gamut_ for the given color space. If the channel is
bounded, or has a percentage mapping with a lower-boundary of zero, then the

> channel is considered _scalable_.

Reviewer 2: This term "scalable" isn't actually referenced anywhere. Is it supposed to be referenced in `color.scale()`?

* `lab`:
  * `lightness`:
    * gamut: un-bounded, scalable
    * number: `[0,100]`

      > Percentages `[0%,100%]` map to the `[0,100]` range.

  * `a`, `b`:
    * gamut: un-bounded
    * number: `[-125,125]`

      > Percentages `[-100%,100%]` map to the `[-125,125]` range.

* `lch`:
  * `lightness`:
    * gamut: un-bounded, scalable
    * number: `[0,100]`

      > Percentages `[0%,100%]` map to the `[0,100]` range.

  * `chroma`:
    * gamut: un-bounded, scalable
    * number: `[0,150]`

      > Percentages `[0%,100%]` map to the `[0,150]` range.

  * `hue`: polar angle

* `oklab`:
  * `lightness`:
    * gamut: un-bounded, scalable
    * number: `[0,1]`

      > Percentages `[0%,100%]` map to the `[0,1]` range.

  * `a`, `b`:
    * gamut: un-bounded
    * number: `[-0.4,0.4]`

      > Percentages `[-100%,100%]` map to the `[-0.4,0.4]` range.

* `oklch`:
  * `lightness`:
    * gamut: un-bounded, scalable
    * number: `[0,1]`

      > Percentages `[0%,100%]` map to the `[0,1]` range.

  * `chroma`:
    * gamut: un-bounded, scalable
    * number: `[0,0.4]`

      > Percentages `[0%,100%]` map to the `[0,0.4]` range.

  * `hue`: polar angle

### Predefined Color Spaces

> > 'Predefined color spaces' can be described using the `color()` function.

Reviewer 2: Does this mean `lab` *et al* can't be described using `color()`?

Reviewer 3: from my understanding of CSS Colors 4, this is indeed the case.

Author: yes, that's correct. There's no overlap between the spaces allowed in `color()` and the spaces that have their own syntax.

The _predefined RGB spaces_ are:

* `srgb`
* `srgb-linear`
* `display-p3`
* `a98-rgb`
* `prophoto-rgb`
* `rec2020`

The _predefined XYZ spaces_ are:

* `xyz`
* `xyz-d50`
* `xyz-d65` (an alias for `xyz`)

### Missing Components

In some cases, a color can have one or more missing components (channel or

> alpha values). Missing components are represented by the keyword `none`. When

Reviewer 2: Consider using the term "special value" instead of "keyword", just because "keyword" has strong syntactic associations and all we care about (at least until we get to functions that interface with SassScript) is that `none` is a particular value that we can detect relative to all other values.

interpolating between colors, the missing component is replaced by the value
of that same component in the other color. In all other cases, the missing
value is treated as `0`.

For the sake of [interpolating] between colors with missing components, the
following _analogous components_ are defined by [CSS Color Level 4][color-4]:

| Category      | Components  |
| Reds          | r,x         |
| Greens        | g,y         |
| Blues         | b,z         |
| Lightness     | l           |

> | Colorfulness  | c,s         |

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't most of these be full words, since they were defined as words in "Known Color Space"?

| Hue           | h           |

If any analogous missing components are present, they will be carried forward

> and re-inserted in the converted color before linear interpolation takes place.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what "carried forward and re-inserted" means. Maybe just leave this up to the interpolation process to specify functionally?

[interpolating]: #interpolating-colors

### Powerless Components

In some color spaces, it is possible for a channel value to become 'powerless'
in certain circumstances. If a powerless channel value is produced as the
result of color-space conversion, then that value is considered to be

> [missing], and is replaced by the keyword `none`.

Reviewer 2: This second sentence is sort of blurring the lines between definition and procedure. Really, it should be up to the conversion procedure to say _what to do_ with powerless components—this should just define _how to tell_ if a component is powerless.

[default-space]: https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color-4/#interpolation-space

## Procedures

### Converting a Color

Colors can be converted from one [known color space] to another. Algorithms for
color conversion are defined in the [CSS Color Level 4][color-4]
specification. Each algorithm takes a color `origin-color`, and a [known color
space] `target-space`, and returns a color `output-color`.

The algorithms are:

* [HSL to sRGB](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#hsl-to-rgb)

* [sRGB to HSL](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#rgb-to-hsl)

* [HWB to sRGB](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#hwb-to-rgb)

* [sRGB to HWB](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#rgb-to-hwb)

* [Lab to LCH, OKLab to OKLCH](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#lab-to-lch)

* [LCH to Lab, OKLCH to OKLab](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#lch-to-lab)

* [Between predefined RGB spaces](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#predefined-to-predefined)

* [Any RGB to Lab/OKLab](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#predefined-to-lab-oklab)

* [Lab/OKLab to any RGB](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#oklab-lab-to-predefined)

> For additional details, see the [Sample code for color conversions][convert].

> 

Reviewer 2: This would be a good place to describe how to handle powerless channels in color conversions.

[convert]: https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#color-conversion-code

### Gamut Mapping

> Some [known color spaces] describe limited [color gamuts](#color-gamuts).
> If a color is 'out of gamut' for a particular space (most often because of
> conversion from a larger-gamut color-space), it can be useful to 'map' that
> color to the nearest available 'in-gamut' color. Gamut mapping is the process
> of finding an in-gamut color with the least objectionable change in visual
> appearance.

Gamut mapping in Sass follows the [CSS gamut mapping algorithm][css-mapping].
This procedure accepts a color `origin` in the color space `origin color space`,
and a destination color space `destination`. It returns the result of a
[CSS gamut map][css-map] procedure, which is a color in the `destination` color
space.

> This algorithm implements a relative colorimetric intent, and colors inside
> the destination gamut are unchanged. Since the process is lossy, authors
> should be encouraged to let the browser handle gamut mapping when possible.

[css-mapping]: https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color/#css-gamut-mapping-algorithm

> [css-map]: https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color/#css-gamut-map

Reviewer 2: I think these links aren't working. Are tehy supposed to go to Color 4?

channel numbers, and a floating-point alpha value.

> This supports both the space-specific color formats like `hsl()` and `rgb()`,
> where the space is determined by the function, as well as the syntax of
> `color()`, where the space is included as one of the input arguments (and may
> be a user-defined space).

The procedure is:

  * If `input` is a [special variable string], return `null`.

  * Let `include-space` be true if `space` is null, and false otherwise.

  * If `input` is a bracketed list, or a list with a separator other than
    'slash' or 'space', throw an error.

  * If `input` is a slash-separated list:

    * If `input` doesn't have exactly two elements, throw an error.

    * Otherwise, let `components` be the first element and `alpha` the second
      element of `input`.

  * Otherwise:

    * Let `components` be an unbracketed space separated list of all except the
      last element of `input`.

    * If the last element of `input` is an unquoted string that contains `/`:

      * Let `split-last` be the result calling `string.split()` with the last
        element of `input` as the string to split, and `/` as the separator.

>       * If there are not two items in `split-last`, throw an error.

Reviewer 2: This logic will break if you have something like `rgb(1 2 3 / calc(var(--alpha-percent) / 100%))`. I think a better solution might be special-casing `none/none`, `none/<number>`, and `<number>/none`, and returning `null` for anything else that contains a slash.

  * If `components` is a [special variable string]:

    * Let `channels` be the value of `components`.

  * Otherwise:

    * If `components` is not an unbracketed space-separated list, throw an error.

    * If `space` is null:

      * Let `input-space` be the first element in `components`.

      * If `input-space` is not either a [known color space] or an unquoted
        string, throw an error.

      * Let `space` be the value of `input-space`.

      * Let `channels` be an unbracketed space-separated list with the
        remaining elements from `components`.

    * Otherwise, let `channels` be the value of `components`.

    * Let `expected` be the number of channels in `space` if `space` is a
      [known color space], and null otherwise.

    * If any element of channels is not either a number, a special variable
      string, a special number string, or the keyword `none`, throw an error.

  * If `alpha` is null, let `alpha` be `1`.

  * Otherwise, If `alpha` is not a [special number string]:

    * If `alpha` is a number, set `alpha` to the result of
      [percent-converting] `alpha` with a max of 1, and then clamping the value

>       between 0 and 1, inclusive.

Reviewer 2: Currently, "percent-converting a number" requires that the input be a percent—but at least in this case, we also want to support raw numbers that don't need percent-conversion.

Author: I'm pretty sure my definition of the percent-converting procedure accepts either - and only performs conversion on percentages.

    * Otherwise, throw an error.

  * If `space` or `channels` is a [special variable string], or if `alpha` is
    a [special number string], return `null`.

  * If any element of `channels` is a [special number string], return `null`.

    > Doing this late in the process allows us to throw any obvious syntax
    > errors, even for colors that can't be fully resolved on the server.

  * If `expected` is not null, and the length of `channels` is not equal to
    `expected`, throw an error.

    > Once special values have been handled, any colors remaining should have
    > exactly the expected number of channels.

  * Set `normal` to the result of [normalizing] `channels` in `space`.

  * If `include-space` is true, let `parsed` be an unbracketed space-separated
    list with `space` as the first element, and `normal` as the second.

  * Otherwise, let `parsed` be the value of `normal`.

  * Return an unbracketed slash-separated list with `parsed` as the first

>     element, and `alpha` as the second.

Reviewer 2: I still think it would just be clearer to say that this function returns three values: a color space name, a list of components, and an alpha value.

    > This results in valid CSS color-value output, while also grouping
    > space, channels, and alpha as separate elements in nested lists.
    > Alternately, we could allow `parsed` to be a single flat list, even
    > when the color-space is included?

[special variable string]: ../spec/functions.md#special-variable-string
[special number string]: ../spec/functions.md#special-number-string
[percent-converting]: #percent-converting-a-number

### Percent-Converting a Number

This algorithm takes a SassScript number `number` and a number `max`. It returns
a number relative to the range `[0,max]` without clamping.

> In order to support both out-of-gamut channels and unbounded ranges, this
> value is no longer clamped between 0 and `max`

* If `number` has units other than `%`, throw an error.

* If `number` has the unit `%`, set `number` to `number * max / 100`, without

>   units.

Reviewer 2: Might be slightly cleaner to just say "`number * max / 100%`"—then you don't need to specify "without units".

* Return `number`.

### Normalizing Color Channels

[normalizing]: #normalizing-color-channels

This process accepts an ordered list `channels` to validate, and a [known color

> space] `space` to normalize against. It throws an error if any channel is

Reviewer 2: This says it requires a known color space, but the caller doesn't guarantee that space is known and this has logic for handling the case where space is unknown.

invalid for a [known color space], or returns a normalized list of valid
channels.

* If `space` is not a [known color space] or an unquoted string, throw an error.

> * If `channels` is not an ordered list, throw an error.

Reviewer 2: You don't need to say "ordered" here, since we're dealing with Sass lists which are always ordered.

in the mix. It returns a new color `mix` that represents the appropriate mix of
input colors.

* If either `color1` or `color2` is not a color, throw an error.

* If `weight` is null, set `weight` to `50%`.

* Set `weight` to the result of [percent-converting] `weight` with a max of 1,
  and then clamping the value between 0 and 1, inclusive.

* Otherwise:

  * If `method` is not a [color interpolation method][color-method], throw an
    error.

  * Let `space` be the _interpolation color space_ specified in `method`.

  * If `space` is a [PolarColorSpace][color-method]:

    * Let `hue-arc` be the `HueInterpolationMethod` specified in `method`, or
      `shorter` if no hue interpolation is specified.

* For each `color` of `color1` and `color2`:

  * Let `origin-space` be `color`'s color space.

  * If `origin-space` is not a [known color space], throw an error.

  * Let `missing` be a list of channel names in `color` that are [missing].

  * Set `color` to the results of [converting] `color` into `space`.

  * For each `channel` in `missing`:

    * If `space` has an [analogous component][missing] to `channel`, set

>       `channel` to `none`.

Reviewer 2: What does this actually do? The `channel` variable is only defined within this loop—is this supposed to be "set `channel`'s *value* to `none`"? But isn't that what it *means* for a channel to be missing?

  * If any `component` of `color` is `none`, set that `component` to the value
    of the corresponding component in the other color.

    > If both values are `none`, the interpolation result for that component
    > will also be `none`.

  * Set `color` to the result of [premultiplying] `color`.

* Let `mix` be a new color in the [known color space] `space`, with `none` for
  alpha and all channel values.

* For each `channel` of `mix`:

  * Let `channel1` and `channel2` be the corresponding channel values in
    `color1` and `color2` respectively.

>   * If `channel` represents a hue angle, set `channel1` and `channel2`

Reviewer 2: I'd say "If `channel` has a polar angle value" to match the definition in Known Color Space.

While deprecated, if the specified color argument is not a [legacy color],
throw an error.

[legacy color]: #legacy-color

## New Color Module Functions

These new functions are part of the built-in `sass:color` module.

### `color.space()`

* ```
  space($color)
  ```

  * If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

  * Return an unquoted string with the name of `$color`s [known color space].

### `color.to-space()`

* ```
  to-space($color, $space)
  ```

  * If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

  * Let `origin-space` be the result of calling `color.space($color)`.

  * If `origin-space == $space`, return `$color`.

    > This allows unknown spaces, as long as they match the origin space.

  * If either `origin-space` or `$space` is not a [known color space], throw an
    error.

  * Return the result of [converting] the `origin-color` `$color` to the
    `target-space` `$space`.

### `color.is-legacy()`

* ```
  is-legacy($color)
  ```

  * If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

  * Return `true` if `$color` is a [legacy color], or `false`
    otherwise.

### `color.is-powerless()`

* ```
  is-powerless($color, $channel, $space: null)
  ```

>   * If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

Reviewer 2: Also verify that channel is an unquoted string.

  * If `$space` is null:

    * Let `color` be `$color`, and let `space` be the result of calling

>       `space($color)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      `color.space($color)`.
```

  * Otherwise:

    * Let `color` be the result of calling `color.to-space($color, $space)`,
      and let `space` be `$space`.

  * If `space` is not a [known color space], throw an error.

>   * If `$channel` is not the name of a channel in the color-space `space`,

Reviewer 2: Do we specify anywhere that channels should be matched case-insensitively?

Author: Yes, in Known Color Space, we say `Space and channel names match unquoted strings, ignoring case.`

    throw an error.

  * Return `true` if the channel `$channel` is [powerless](#powerless-components)
    in `color`, otherwise return `false`.

### `color.is-in-gamut()`

* ```
  is-in-gamut($color, $space: null)
  ```

  * If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

>   * Let `space` be the value of `$space` if specified, or the result of calling

Reviewer 2: We should verify that `space` is quoted here. I wonder if it makes sense to make a small "Look Up a Known Color Space" procedure that maps a SassScript argument to a color space?

  * Otherwise, return `true`.

### `color.to-gamut()`

* ```
  to-gamut($color, $space: null)
  ```

  * If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

  * Let `origin-space` be the result of calling `color.space($color)`.

  * Let `target-space` be the value of `$space` if specified, or the value of
    `origin-space` otherwise.

  * If `target-space` is not a [known color space], throw an error.

  * Return the result of [gamut mapping] with `$color` as the
    origin color, `origin-space` as the origin color space, and
    `target-space` as the destination color space.

[gamut mapping]: #gamut-mapping

### `color.channel()`

> Note that channel values are stored as specified, even if those values are
> out-of-gamut for the [known color space] used. Similarly, this color-channel
> inspection function may return out-of-gamut channel values.

* ```
  channel($color, $channel, $space: null)
  ```

  * If `$space` is null:

    * Let `space` be the result of calling `color.space($color)`, and let
      `color` be the value of `$color`.

  * Otherwise:

    * Let `color` be the result of calling `color.to-space($color, $space)`,
      and let `space` be the value of `$space`.

>   * Let `channels` be a map 1-indexed integer channel keys and their
>     corresponding values in `color`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Let `channels` be a map from 1-indexed integer channel keys to their
    corresponding names in `color`.
```

Author: I think we still want the values here, not the names.

  * If `space` is a [known color space]:

    * Let `named-channels` be a map of channel names defined by `space`, and
      their corresponding values in `color`.

    * Set `channels` to the result of `map.merge(channels, named-channels)`.

>   * Let `value` be the result of calling `map.get(channels, $channel)`.

Reviewer 2: We should probably also throw an error if `$channel` isn't a number or unquoted string.

  * If `value` is `null`, throw an error.

  * Otherwise, return `value`.

## Modified Color Module Functions

### `color.hwb()`

These functions are now deprecated. Authors should use global `hwb()` instead.

> Channel clamping and scaling have been removed from the global function,

> > since we now allow out-of-gamut color-channels to be stored as specified.

Reviewer 2: I thought HWB didn't support out-of-gamut colors.

* ```
  hwb($channels)
  ```

  * Return the result of calling the global function `hwb($channels)`.

* ```
  hwb($hue, $whiteness, $blackness, $alpha: 1)
  ```

  * Return the result of calling the global function

>     `hwb($hue $whiteness $blackness / $alpha)`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    `hwb(list.slash($hue $whiteness $blackness, $alpha))`.
```

Just so this doesn't invoke some weird sideways string parsing behavior.

  * Let `normal-weight` be `weight-scale * 2 - 1`.

  * Let `alpha1` and `alpha2` be the alpha values of `color1` and `color2`,
    respectively.

  * Let `alpha-distance` be `alpha1 - alpha2`.

  * Let `weight-by-distance` be `normal-weight * alpha-distance`.

  * If `weight-by-distance == -1`, let `combined-weight1` be `normal-weight`.

  * Otherwise:

    * Let `weight-distance-sum` be `normal-weight + alpha-distance`.

    * Let `combined-weight1` be `weight-distance-sum / (1 + weight-by-distance)`.

  * Let `weight1` be `(combined-weight1 + 1) / 2`.

  * Let `weight2` be `1 - weight1`.

  * Let `red1` and `red2` be the red channels of `color1` and `color2`
    respectively.

  * Let `red` be the result of rounding `red1 * weight1 + red2 * weight2` to
    the nearest integer.

  * Let `green1` and `green2` be the green channels of `color1` and `color2`
    respectively.

  * Let `green` be the result of rounding `green1 * weight1 + green2 * weight2`
    to the nearest integer.

  * Let `blue1` and `blue2` be the blue channels of `color1` and `color2`
    respectively.

  * Let `blue` be the result of rounding `blue1 * weight1 + blue2 * weight2` to

>     the nearest integer.

Reviewer 2: We don't need to do this rounding anymore, since it'll make the result strictly less accurate.

  * Let `alpha` be `alpha1 * weight-scale + alpha2 * (1 - weight-scale)`.

  * Return a [legacy color] in the `rgb` space, with the given `red`, `green`,
    and `blue` channels, and `alpha` value.

* Otherwise:

  * If `$method` is not a [color interpolation method][color-method], throw an
    error.

  * Let `space` be the [known color space] specified in `$method`.

> * If `space` is unquoted and `space == hsl` or `space == hwb`:

Reviewer 2: "is unquoted" is necessary, since it's already implied by `$method`'s parsing.

  * Let `color1` and `color2` be the result of [converting] and

>     [gamut mapping] `$color1` and `$color2` respectively into `space`.

Reviewer 2: I would expect the conversion procedure to *always* gamut-map for hsl and hwb.

  > These color spaces are unable to express colors outside the `srgb` gamut.

* Otherwise, let `color1` and `color2` be the result of [converting]
  `$color1` and `$color2` respectively into `space`.

* Return the result of [interpolating] between `color1` and `color2` with the

>   specified `$weight` and `$method`.

Reviewer 2: Didn't we decide that this should convert back into `$color1`'s space?

### `color.change()`

```
change($color, $args...)
```

This function is also available as a global function named `change-color()`.

* If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

* If any item in `$args` is not a keyword argument, throw an error.

* Let `space` be `$color`'s color space.

* If the keyword argument `$space` is specified in `$args`:

    * If `$space` is not a [known color space], and `$space != space`, throw an
      error.

    * Set `space` to the value of `$space`.

    * Let `color` be the result of [converting] `$color` to `space`.

* Otherwise, let `color` be the value of `$color`.

* Let `legacy` be `true` if `$color` is a legacy color and `space` is a

>   legacy color space, and `false` otherwise.

Reviewer 2: It looks like this isn't actually referenced anywhere. Same for `adjust()` and `scale()`.

* Let `alpha` be `color`'s alpha property.

* If the keyword argument `$alpha` is specified in `$args`:

    * Set `alpha` to the result of [percent-converting] `$alpha`, and clamping
      it between 0 and 1 (inclusive).

* Let `channel-args` be the remaining keyword arguments in `$args`, not

>   including `$space` or `$alpha` arguments.

Reviewer 2: We should verify that there aren't extra arguments that *don't* match the color's channels. Same for `adjust()` and `scale()`.

Author: We do that in the step where we loop through `channel-args`, since we first have to parse integer channel names. Then we throw an error if either the keyword or index fails to match.

* Let `channels` be a list of the `color`'s channels.

* For each keyword `key` and value `new` in `channel-args`:

  * If `key` is a string in the format `channel<integer>`, set `key` to the
    value of `<integer>`.

    > This allows e.g. `color.change($color, $channel1: 0.25)` for changing
    > color channels in unknown color spaces.

  * If `key` is not the name or index of a channel in `channels`, throw an
    error.

>   * Set the corresponding `channel` in `channels` to `new`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Set the corresponding `channel`'s value in `channels` to `new`.
```

>   * Set the corresponding `channel` in `channels` to `new`.

Reviewer 2: We should verify the value of `new` is valid. Same for `adjust()` and `scale()`.

Author: This is handled by the normalization step, after we've made all the requested changes.

* If `space` is a [known color space], set `channels` to the result of
  [normalizing] `channels` in `space`.

* Return a color in color space `space`, with `channels` channels, and an alpha
  of `alpha`.

### `color.adjust()`

```
adjust($color, $args...)
```

This function is also available as a global function named `adjust-color()`.

* If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

* If any item in `$args` is not a keyword argument, throw an error.

* Let `space` be `$color`'s color space.

* If the keyword argument `$space` is specified in `$args`:

    * If `$space` is not a [known color space], and `$space != space`, throw an
      error.

    * Set `space` to the value of `$space`.

    * Let `color` be the result of [converting] `$color` to `space`.

* Otherwise, let `color` be the value of `$color`.

* Let `legacy` be `true` if `$color` is a legacy color and `space` is a
  legacy color space, and `false` otherwise.

* Let `alpha` be `color`'s alpha property.

* If the keyword argument `$alpha` is specified in `$args`:

    * If `$alpha` is not a unitless number between `-1` and `1` (inclusive),

>       throw an error.

Reviewer 2: Not relevant to this PR, but we should really support %s here.

Author: This is a simple change, and it seems like now is as good a time as any?

    * Set `alpha` to the value of `$alpha + alpha` clamped between 0 and 1.

* Let `channel-args` be the remaining keyword arguments in `$args`, not
  including `$space` or `$alpha` arguments.

* Let `channels` be a list of the `color`'s channels.

* For each keyword `key` and value `adjust` in `channel-args`:

  * If `key` is a string in the format `channel<integer>`, set `key` to the
    value of `<integer>`.

    > This allows e.g. `color.change($color, $channel1: 0.25)` for changing
    > color channels in unknown color spaces.

  * If `key` is not the name or index of a channel in `channels`, throw an
    error.

  * Set the corresponding `channel` in `channels` to `channel + adjust`,

>     treating any `none` keyword as a value of `0`.

Reviewer 2: Should we allow percent-conversion here? There's a useful and unambiguous meaning for `color.adjust(red, $red: -20%)`.

* If `space` is a [known color space], set `channels` to the result of

>   [normalizing] `channels` in `space`.

Reviewer 2: Is this necessary for `adjust()`? When can it come up?

* Return a color in color space `space`, with `channels` channels, and an alpha
  of `alpha`.

### `color.scale()`

```
scale($color, $args...)
```

This function is also available as a global function named `scale-color()`.

* If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

* If any item in `$args` is not a keyword argument, throw an error.

> * Let `space` be `$color`'s [known color space].

Reviewer 2: What if `$color`'s space isn't known?

    throw an error.

    > This currently allows `hsl`, `hwb`, `lch`, and `oklch`. We may decide to
    > provide additional options in the future.

  * Let `space` be the value of `$space`.

* Return the result of calling
  `color.adjust($color, $hue: 180deg, $space: space)`.

### `color.invert()`

```
invert($color, $space: null)
```

This function is also available as a global function named `invert()`.

* If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

* If `$space` is null:

  * If `$color` is a legacy color, let `space` be `rgb`, and let `mix-space`
    be null.

    > This allows us to also enforce legacy behavior in the final weighted mix.

  * Otherwise, throw an error.

* Otherwise:

  * If `$space` is not a [known color space], throw an error.

  * Let `space` be `$space`, and let `mix-space` be `$space`.

* Let `color` be the result of [converting] and [gamut mapping] `$color`
  into the color space `space`.

* If `space == hwb`:

  * Let `hue`, `whiteness`, and `blackness` be the three elements of `color`'s
    channels.

  * Let `hue-out` be the result of `(hue + 180deg) % 360deg`.

  * Let `gray` be the result of `whiteness + blackness`.

>   * Let `white` be `gray - whiteness`, and let `black` be `gray - blackness`.

Reviewer 2: This will always just set `white` to `blackness` and `black` to `whiteness`.

  * Let `invert` be the result of calling
    `color.change(color, $hue: hue-out, $whiteness: white, $blackness: black)`.

* Otherwise:

  * Let `invert` be the value of `color`.

  * For each `channel` element in `color`'s channels:

    * If `channel` represents a polar-angle hue:

      * Let `new` be `(channel + 180deg) % 360deg`.

>     * Otherwise, if `channel` represents either chroma or saturation:

Reviewer 2: "represents" is somewhat underspecified here. Maybe just say "if `channel`'s name is either `chroma` or `saturation`"

      * Let `new` be `channel`.

    * Otherwise:

      * Let `min` and `max` be the minimum and maximum values defined for
        `channel` in `space`.

      * Let `new` be `max - channel` if `min == 0`, and `channel * -1` otherwise.

    * Set the corresponding channel of `invert` to be `new`.

* Return the result of calling `color.mix(invert, color, $weight, mix-space)`.

### `color.grayscale()`

```
grayscale($color)
```

> No space argument is provided, since the results should always be in gamut.

This function is also available as a global function named `grayscale()`.

* If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

* If `$color` is a legacy color:

  * Return the result of [converting] `$color` to `hsl`, and changing the
    'saturation' channel to 0.

* Otherwise:

>   * Let `origin` be `$color`'s [known color space].

Reviewer 2: What if its color space isn't known?

  * Let `color` be the result of [converting] `$color` to `oklch`, and
    setting the `chroma` channel to 0.

  * Return the result of [converting] `color` to `origin`.

### `color.ie-hex-str()`

This function is also available as a global function named `ie-hex-str()`. Both
functions are deprecated.

```
ie-hex-str($color)
```

* If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

> * Let `rgb` be the result of [converting] `$color` to `rgb`.

Reviewer 2: I think this should gamut-map too, since there's no way to represent out-of-gamut colors in the 8-digit hex format.

lightness & darkness adjustments are most reliable in `oklch`:

```scss
$brand: hsl(0 100% 25.1%);

// result: hsl(0 100% 43.8%)
$hsl-lightness: color.scale($brand, $lightness: 25%);

// result: hsl(5.76 56% 45.4%)
$oklch-lightness: color.scale($brand, $lightness: 25%, $space: oklch);
```

Note that the returned color is still emitted in the original color space, even
when the adjustment is performed in a different space.

### Design Decisions

Most of the design decisions involved in the proposal are based on the
[CSS Color Level 4][color-4] specification, which we have tried to emulate as
closely as possible, while maintaining support for legacy projects. In some
cases, that required major changes to the way Sass handles colors:

1. RGB-style channel values are no longer clamped to the gamut of a color space,
   except for the `hsl` and `hwb` spaces, which are unable to represent
   out-of-gamut colors. By default Sass will output CSS with out-of-gamut
   colors, because browsers can provide better gamut mapping based on the user
   device capabilities. However, authors can use the provided `color.to-gamut()`
   function to enforce mapping a color into a specific gamut.

> 2. RGB channel values are no longer rounded to the nearest integer, since the

Author: ```suggestion
2. RGB-style channel values are no longer rounded to the nearest integer, since the
```

following _analogous components_ are defined by [CSS Color Level 4][color-4]:

| Category      | Components          |
| ------------- | ------------------- |
| Reds          | red, x              |
| Greens        | green, y            |
| Blues         | blue, z             |
| Lightness     | lightness           |
| Colorfulness  | chroma, saturation  |
| Hue           | hue                 |

[interpolating]: #interpolating-colors

### Powerless Components

In some color spaces, it is possible for a channel value to become 'powerless'
in certain circumstances.

* `hsl`:

  * If the `saturation` value is `0%`, then the `hue` channel is powerless.

  * If the `lightness` value is either `0%` or `100%`, then both the `hue` and
    `saturation` values are powerless.

* `hwb`:

  * If the combined `whiteness` and `blackness` values (after normalization)
    are equal to `100%`, then the `hue` channel is powerless.

* `lab`/`oklab`:

  * If the `lightness` value is `0%`, then both the `a` and `b` channels are
    powerless.

  > The current spec has an inline issue asking if high values of
  > `lightness` (whites) should make the `a` and `b` values powerless:

>   > See: https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color-4/#issue-e05ac5c3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  > See: https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#issue-e05ac5c3
```

&#32;                          | 'xyz'
&#32;                          | 'xyz-d50'
&#32;                          | 'xyz-d65'
**PolarColorSpace**          ::= 'hsl'
&#32;                          | 'hwb'
&#32;                          | 'lch'
&#32;                          | 'oklch'
**HueInterpolationMethod**   ::= (
&#32;                                'shorter'
&#32;                              | 'longer'
&#32;                              | 'increasing'
&#32;                              | 'decreasing'
&#32;                              | 'specified'
&#32;                            ) 'hue'
</pre></x>

The resulting _interpolation color space_ is the [known color space] whose name
is given by either the `PolarColorSpace` or `RectangularColorSpace` productions.

> Different color interpolation methods provide different advantages. For that
> reason, individual color procedures and functions can establish their own
> color interpolation defaults, or provide a syntax for authors to explicitly
> choose the method that best fits their need. The [CSS Color Level 4][color-4]
> specification provides [additional guidance][default-space] for determining
> appropriate defaults.

> [default-space]: https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color-4/#interpolation-space

Reviewer: should this go to "https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#interpolation-space"?

Author: That's a good question. The published version is certainly more official. But for a spec that's still being worked on, it can also be more out of date, since an ED can have officially resolved changes just waiting to be published. @nex3 do you have a preference?

Reviewer 3: Given that CSS Colors 4 is already at the CR state, I suggest linking to the published version. This way, the Sass spec won't need to be updated when it reaches the recommendation state. But I'll let @nex3 give her opinion there.
Implementors might still look at the ED for existing clarifications in the meantime.

According to the published version, it is expected to stay at CR state until at least October 5 to gather feedback. As Colors 4 is in the scope of Interop2022, we might expect it to move forward after that date.

Author: ```suggestion
[default-space]: https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#interpolation-space
```

Reviewer 2: I don't have a strong opinion here, but if the published version has all the terms we explicitly reference I guess it's probably the better option.

[missing]: #missing-components
[powerless]: #powerless-components

> For additional details, see the [Sample code for color conversions][convert].

[convert]: https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#color-conversion-code

### Gamut Mapping

> Some [known color spaces] describe limited [color gamuts](#color-gamuts).
> If a color is 'out of gamut' for a particular space (most often because of
> conversion from a larger-gamut color-space), it can be useful to 'map' that
> color to the nearest available 'in-gamut' color. Gamut mapping is the process
> of finding an in-gamut color with the least objectionable change in visual
> appearance.

Gamut mapping in Sass follows the [CSS gamut mapping algorithm][css-mapping].
This procedure accepts a color `origin` in the color space `origin color space`,
and a destination color space `destination`. It returns the result of a
[CSS gamut map][css-map] procedure, which is a color in the `destination` color
space.

> This algorithm implements a relative colorimetric intent, and colors inside
> the destination gamut are unchanged. Since the process is lossy, authors
> should be encouraged to let the browser handle gamut mapping when possible.

> [css-mapping]: https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color-4/#css-gamut-mapping-algorithm

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[css-mapping]: https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#css-gamut-mapping-algorithm
```

> [css-map]: https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color-4/#css-gamut-map

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[css-map]: https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#css-gamut-map
```

* If `space` is not a [known color space] or an unquoted string, throw an error.

* If `channel` is not a number or the special value `none`, throw an error.

* If `channel == NaN`, throw an error.

* If `channel` is the special value `none`, or if `space` is not a [known color
  space], return `channel`.

  > We don't attempt further channel validation for unknown color spaces.

* Otherwise:

  * Let `valid` be the corresponding channel defined by the [known color space]
    `space` with a name or index of `key`.

  * If `valid` is a polar-angle `hue`:

    * Return the result of converting `channel` to `deg` allowing unitless.

    > Normalizing the result into a half-open range of `[0,360)` would be a
    > lossy transformation, since some forms of [hue interpolation][hue-method]
    > require the specified hue values.

  * Otherwise, if `valid` requires a percentage:

    * If `channel` is a number with units other than `%`, throw an error.

    * Return `channel`.

  * Otherwise, return the result of [percent-converting] `channel` with a `max`
    defined by the `valid` channel range.

### Normalizing Color Channels

[normalizing]: #normalizing-color-channels

> This process accepts a list `channels` to validate, and a color space `space`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This process accepts a list of `channels` to validate, and a color space `space`
```

to normalize against. It throws an error if any channel is invalid for the
color space, or returns a normalized list of valid channels otherwise.

* If `space` is not a [known color space] or an unquoted string, throw an error.

* If `channels` is not a list, throw an error.

* Let `normal` be an empty list.

* For each `channel` in `channels`:

  * Let `key` be the name of `channel` in `space` if `space` is a [known color
    space], and the index of `channel` in `channels` otherwise.

  * Let `valid` be the result of [validating] `channel` as `key` channel in
    `space`.

  * Append `valid` as the next item in `normal`.

* Return `normal`.

### Interpolating Colors

> This procedure is based on the

> > [color interpolation](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color-4/#interpolation)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [color interpolation](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#interpolation)
```

  `rgb()` accepting a range from 0-255, and `srgb` using a range of 0-1.

* Color functions that allow specifying a color space for manipulation will
  always use the source color space by default. When an explicit space is
  provided for manipulation, the resulting color will still be returned in the
  same space as the origin color. For `color.mix()`, the first color parameter
  is considered the origin color.

* All legacy and RGB-style spaces represent bounded gamuts of color. When
  converting colors into a bounded gamut space, out-of-gamut channel values are
  maintained whenever possible. The only exception is that `hsl` and `hwb`
  color spaces are not able to express out-of-gamut color, so converting colors
  into those spaces will gamut-map the colors as well. Authors should be
  careful converting colors into these spaces, since gamut mapping is a lossy
  process.

* Mapping colors into a gamut is a lossy process. Whenever possible, it should
  be left to the browser, which can map colors based on a given user's display
  capabilities. However, authors can perform explicit gamut mapping with the

>   `color.to-gamut()` function.

Reviewer 2: This seems mostly redundant with the last bullet point, other than mentioning `color.to-gamut()`. Maybe the two should be merged?

  `color.to-gamut()`, which can be used for manual gamut-mapping.

Unfortunately, the legacy `hsl` and `hwb` color spaces are not able to express
out-of-gamut colors, even with out-of-range channel values, so any conversion
into those spaces (using `color.to-gamut()` or manipulating colors in those
spaces) must always require gamut-mapping into the `srgb` gamut. This is
defined as part of the [CSS Color Level 4][color-4] specification for
[converting] colors.

## Definitions

### Color

> Note that channel values are stored as specified, maintaining precision where
> possible, even when the values are out-of-gamut for the [known color space].

A *color* is an object with several parts:

* A *color space* that is either a [known color space] or an unquoted string.

* An ordered list of *channel* values, either a floating-point number or the
  special value `none`.

* An *alpha* value that is either the special value `none` or a floating-point
  number between `0-1` (inclusive).

  > While it's valid to specify numbers outside this range, they are
  > meaningless, and can be clamped by input functions when generating a color.

[known color space]: #known-color-space

> #### Serialization of Non-Legacy Colors

Reviewer 2: This should probably be in a separate "Serialization" section.

To serialize a non-legacy color `color`:

> * Let `components` be a space-separated list of `color`'s channel values.

Reviewer 2: Channel values aren't intrinsically SassScript values, so this should explain how to convert from the one to the other. In particular:

* Which units (if any) do which channels have?
* What SassScript value should missing channels have?

* Let `alpha` be the alpha value of `color`.

* If `alpha != 1`:

  * Set `components` to the result of appending " / " and then the values of
    `alpha` to the end of `components`.

* Let `color-space` be a lowercase string of the [color space] name.

* If `color` has a [predefined color space]:

  * Emit "color(", followed by `color-space`, " ", `components`, and then ")".

> * Otherwise, emit `color-space` followed by "(", `components`, and then ")".

Reviewer 2: It looks like this will emit unknown color spaces as their own Sass functions, which I think is incorrect. We should probably explicitly list the color spaces that have their own function names, and emit the `color()` function as the default.

&#32;                              | 'longer'
&#32;                              | 'increasing'
&#32;                              | 'decreasing'
&#32;                              | 'specified'
&#32;                            ) 'hue'
</pre></x>

The _interpolation color space_ is the result of [looking up a known color
space] named by either the `PolarColorSpace` or `RectangularColorSpace`
productions.

> Different color interpolation methods provide different advantages. For that
> reason, individual color procedures and functions can establish their own
> color interpolation defaults, or provide a syntax for authors to explicitly
> choose the method that best fits their need. The [CSS Color Level 4][color-4]
> specification provides [additional guidance][default-space] for determining
> appropriate defaults.

[default-space]: https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#interpolation-space

## Procedures

### Looking Up a Known Color Space

This procedure accepts a `name`, and attempts to look up a [known color space]
with a matching name. It throws an error if `name` is not a valid color space
name, and either returns the known color space, or `name` if no color space is

> matched.

Reviewer 2: It's kind of confusing that this can return either a color space *or* the name of a color space—it means that any spec invoking this procedure could end up working with two different "types". Maybe it should just return null if the space isn't known?

space] `target-space`, and returns a color `output-color`.

The algorithms are:

* [HSL to sRGB](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#hsl-to-rgb)

* [sRGB to HSL](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#rgb-to-hsl)

* [HWB to sRGB](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#hwb-to-rgb)

* [sRGB to HWB](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#rgb-to-hwb)

* [Lab to LCH, OKLab to OKLCH](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#lab-to-lch)

* [LCH to Lab, OKLCH to OKLab](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#lch-to-lab)

* [Between predefined RGB spaces](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#predefined-to-predefined)

* [Any RGB to Lab/OKLab](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#predefined-to-lab-oklab)

* [Lab/OKLab to any RGB](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#oklab-lab-to-predefined)

If a [powerless] channel value is produced as the result of color-space
conversion, then that value is considered to be [missing], and is replaced by
the special value `none`.

[missing]: #missing-components
[powerless]: #powerless-components

> For additional details, see the [Sample code for color conversions][convert].

[convert]: https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#color-conversion-code

### Gamut Mapping

> > Some [known color spaces] describe limited [color gamuts](#color-gamuts).

Reviewer 2: Broken Markdown link

and an alpha value.

> This supports both the space-specific color formats like `hsl()` and `rgb()`,
> where the space is determined by the function, as well as the syntax of
> `color()`, where the space is included as one of the input arguments (and may
> be a user-defined space).

The procedure is:

  * If `input` is a [special variable string], return `null`.

  * If `input` is a bracketed list, or a list with a separator other than
    'slash' or 'space', throw an error.

  * If `input` is a slash-separated list:

    * If `input` doesn't have exactly two elements, throw an error.

    * Otherwise, let `components` be the first element and `alpha` the second
      element of `input`.

  * Otherwise:

    * Let `components` be an unbracketed space separated list of all except the
      last element of `input`.

    * If the last element of `input` is an unquoted string that contains `/`:

      * Let `split-last` be the result calling `string.split()` with the last
        element of `input` as the string to split, and `/` as the separator.

      * If either item in `split-last` can be coerced to a number, replace the

>         current value of the item with the resulting number value.

Reviewer 2: I think you may have missed this comment from earlier:

> This logic will break if you have something like `rgb(1 2 3 / calc(var(--alpha-percent) / 100%))`. I think a better solution might be special-casing `none/none`, `none/<number>`, and `<number>/none`, and returning `null` for anything else that contains a slash.

  * If `expected` is not null, and the length of `channels` is not equal to
    `expected`, throw an error.

    > Once special values have been handled, any colors remaining should have
    > exactly the expected number of channels.

  * If `space` is a [known color space], set `channels` to the result of
    [normalizing] `channels` in `space`.

  * Return color space `space`, `channels` channels, and `alpha` alpha value.

[special variable string]: ../spec/functions.md#special-variable-string
[special number string]: ../spec/functions.md#special-number-string
[percent-converting]: #percent-converting-a-number

### Percent-Converting a Number

This algorithm takes a SassScript number `number` and a number `max`. It returns
a number relative to the range `[0,max]` without clamping.

> In order to support both out-of-gamut channels and unbounded ranges, this
> value is no longer clamped between 0 and `max`

* If `number` has units other than `%`, throw an error.

* If `number` has the unit `%`, set `number` to `number * max / 100%`.

* Return `number`.

### Validating a Color Channel

[validating]: #validating-a-color-channel

> This process accepts a `channel` to validate, a color space `space` to validate

Reviewer 2: Probably worth mentioning that `channel` is a SassScript value.

against, and the `key` name or index of the channel. It throws an error if the
channel is invalid for the color space, or returns a normalized channel value otherwise.

* Set `space` to the result of [looking up a known color space] with the name
  `space`.

> * If `channel` is not a number or the special value `none`, throw an error.

Reviewer 2: The "special value" we store in the abstract color objects for `none` doesn't have an intrinsic SassScript representation. We should be more explicit here and say "...or an unquoted string that's case-insensitively equal to `'none'`".

* If `channel == NaN`, throw an error.

* If `channel` is the special value `none`, or if `space` is not a [known color
  space], return `channel`.

  > We don't attempt further channel validation for unknown color spaces.

* Otherwise:

  * Let `valid` be the corresponding channel defined by the [known color space]
    `space` with a name or index of `key`.

  * If `valid` is a polar-angle `hue`:

>     * Return the result of converting `channel` to `deg` allowing unitless.

Reviewer 2: Probably a good idea to link to https://github.com/sass/sass/blob/main/spec/types/number.md#converting-a-number-to-a-unit here.

    > Normalizing the result into a half-open range of `[0,360)` would be a
    > lossy transformation, since some forms of [hue interpolation][hue-method]

>     > require the specified hue values.

Reviewer 2: We definitely can't do this on color creation, but should we say that `color.adjust()` should do it since that'll be the most common way people will go outside the usual range and modding is desirable 99% of the time?

  * Let `combined-weight1` be `weight-distance-sum / (1 + weight-by-distance)`.

* Let `weight1` be `(combined-weight1 + 1) / 2`.

* Let `weight2` be `1 - weight1`.

* Let `red1` and `red2` be the red channels of `rgb1` and `rgb2` respectively.

* Let `red` be `red1 * weight1 + red2 * weight2`.

* Let `green1` and `green2` be the green channels of `rgb1` and `rgb2`
  respectively.

* Let `green` be `green1 * weight1 + green2 * weight2`.

* Let `blue1` and `blue2` be the blue channels of `rgb1` and `rgb2`
  respectively.

* Let `blue` be `blue1 * weight1 + blue2 * weight2`.

* Let `alpha` be `alpha1 * weight-scale + alpha2 * (1 - weight-scale)`.

* Let `mix` be a [legacy color] in the `rgb` space, with the given `red`,
  `green`, and `blue` channels, and `alpha` value.

* Return the result of [converting] `mix` into `origin-space`.

[legacy interpolation]: #interpolating-legacy-colors

### Interpolating Colors

> This procedure is based on the
> [color interpolation](https://www.w3.org/TR/css-color-4/#interpolation)
> procedures defined in [CSS Color Level 4][color-4].

This procedure accepts two color arguments (`color1` and `color2`), a

> [color interpolation method] `method`, and a percentage `weight` for `color1`

Reviewer 2: Broken Markdown link

input colors.

* If either `color1` or `color2` is not a color in a [known color space], throw
  an error.

* Let `origin-space` be `color1`'s color space.

* If `weight` is null, set `weight` to `0.5`.

* Otherwise, set `weight` to the result of [percent-converting] `weight` with a
  max of 1, and then clamping the value between 0 and 1 (inclusive).

* Let `space` be the _interpolation color space_ specified by the `method`
  [color interpolation method].

  > Only known color spaces are allowed as part of a color interpolation method.

* If `space` is a [PolarColorSpace][color-method]:

    * Let `hue-arc` be the `HueInterpolationMethod` specified in `method`, or
      `shorter` if no hue interpolation is specified.

* For each `color` of `color1` and `color2`:

  * Let `missing` be a list of channel names in `color` that are [missing].

  * Set `color` to the results of [converting] `color` into `space`.

  * For each `channel` in `missing`:

    * If `space` has an [analogous component][missing] to `channel`, set
      the analogous component in `color` to `none`.

  * If any `component` of `color` is `none`, set that `component` to the value

>     of the corresponding component in the other color.

Reviewer 2: It's unclear here whether "the other color" refers to that color _before_ or _after_ it's been converted into `space`. I assume it's after, because otherwise the other color isn't guaranteed to even have the same channel name, but maybe this logic should happen after this loop so that it's clear it's done once both colors have been converted to `space`.

* Otherwise, return `number + number * factor / 100%`.

## New Color Module Functions

These new functions are part of the built-in `sass:color` module.

### `color.space()`

```
space($color)
```

* If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

* Return an unquoted string with the name of `$color`s color space.

### `color.to-space()`

```
to-space($color, $space)
```

* If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

* Let `origin-space` be the result of calling `color.space($color)`.

* If `origin-space == $space`, return `$color`.

  > This allows unknown spaces, as long as they match the origin space.

* Let `space` be the result of [looking up a known color space] named `$space`.

* If either `origin-space` or `space` is not a [known color space], throw an
  error.

* Return the result of [converting] the `origin-color` `$color` to the
  `target-space` `$space`.

### `color.is-legacy()`

```
is-legacy($color)
```

* If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

* Return `true` if `$color` is a [legacy color], or `false` otherwise.

### `color.is-powerless()`

```
is-powerless($color, $channel, $space: null)
```

* If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

> * If `$channel` is not an unquoted string, throw an error.

Reviewer 2: For consistency with `color.channel()`, we should probably allow indices here.

* If `$space` is null:

  * Let `color` be `$color`

  * Let `space` be the result of calling `color.space($color)`.

* Otherwise:

  * Let `color` be the result of calling `color.to-space($color, $space)`.

  * Let `space` be the result of [looking up a known color space] named
    `$space`.

* If `space` is not a [known color space], throw an error.

* If `$channel` is not the name of a channel in the color-space `space`,
  throw an error.

* Return `true` if the channel `$channel` is [powerless] in `color`,
  otherwise return `false`.

### `color.is-in-gamut()`

```
is-in-gamut($color, $space: null)
```

* If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

* If `$space` is null, let `space` be the result of calling
  `color.space($color)`.

* Otherwise, let `space` be the result of [looking up a known color space]
  named `$space`.

* If `space` is not a [known color space], throw an error.

* Let `color` be the result of calling `color.to-space($color, space)`.

* For all bounded channels in `space`, if the associated channel value in

>   `$color` is outside the bounded range, return `false`.

Reviewer 2: I think this should use fuzzy comparisons, so that any color that's `==` to an in-gamut color is considered in-gamut itself.

```

This function is also available as a global function named `change-color()`.

* If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

* If any item in `$args` is not a keyword argument, throw an error.

* Let `origin-space` be `$color`'s color space.

* If the keyword argument `$space` is specified in `$args`:

    * Let `space` be the result of [looking up a known color space] named
      `$space`.

    * If `space` is not a [known color space], and `space != origin-space`,
      throw an error.

      > We can make changes in an unknown space, but we can't do conversion.

    * Let `color` be the result of [converting] `$color` to `space`.

* Otherwise:

  * Let `space` be `origin-space`.

  * Let `color` be the value of `$color`.

* Let `alpha` be `color`'s alpha property.

* If the keyword argument `$alpha` is specified in `$args`:

    * Set `alpha` to the result of [percent-converting] `$alpha`, and clamping
      it between 0 and 1 (inclusive).

* Let `channel-args` be the remaining keyword arguments in `$args`, not
  including `$space` or `$alpha` arguments.

* Let `channels` be a list of the `color`'s channels.

* For each keyword `key` and value `new` in `channel-args`:

>   * If `new` is not a number or the special value `none`, throw an error.

Reviewer 2: Same comment as above: we need to be explicit about how to recognize a SassScript value that indicates `none`.

* Let `alpha` be `color`'s alpha property.

* If the keyword argument `$alpha` is specified in `$args`:

  * If `$alpha` is not a number, throw an error.

  * Let `new-alpha` be the result of [percent-converting] `$alpha` with a max
    of 1.

  * Set `alpha` to the value of `new-alpha + alpha` clamped between 0 and 1.

* Let `channel-args` be the remaining keyword arguments in `$args`, not
  including `$space` or `$alpha` arguments.

* Let `channels` be a list of the `color`'s channels.

* For each keyword `key` and value `adjust` in `channel-args`:

  * If `key` is a string in the format `channel<integer>`, set `key` to the
    value of `<integer>`.

    > This allows e.g. `color.adjust($color, $channel1: 0.25)` for adjusting
    > color channels in unknown color spaces.

  * If `key` is not the name or index of a channel in `channels`, throw an
    error.

  * Set `adjust` to the result of [validating] `adjust` as `key` channel in
    `space`.

    > This ensures that `adjust` is percent-converted when necessary, and
    > throws errors when the adjustment is not a valid value for the space.

  * Set the `channel` with name or index of `key` in `channels` to

>     `channel + adjust`, treating values of `none` as `0`.

Reviewer 2: Since `none` indicates that the channel value is _irrelevant_, should we just preserve it as-is even if an adjustment is made to it?

Author: I would expect `adjust()` and `scale()` to have the same behavior here. Likely choosing between:

- Maintain `none` as an irrelevant channel. This strikes me as potentially confusing for authors, since it results in no change and no notification?
- Adjust/scale from `0`.
- Throw an error.

CSS color 5 has a similar situation, where color channels can be adjusted in a relative color syntax. I don't see it clearly defined in that spec what should happen when missing channels are adjusted. I think it would be great to follow their lead if we're able? I've reached out to Chris, and can also open an issue in CSS. My expectation would be either adjusting-from-0, or considering it an invalid operation.

* Let `new` be a color in color space `space`, with `channels` channels, and an
  alpha of `alpha`.

* Return the result of [converting] `new` into `origin-space`.

### `color.scale()`

```
scale($color, $args...)
```

This function is also available as a global function named `scale-color()`.

* If `$color` is not a color in a [known color space], throw an error.

* If any item in `$args` is not a keyword argument, throw an error.

* Let `origin-space` be `$color`'s color space.

* If the keyword argument `$space` is specified in `$args`:

    * Let `space` be the result of [looking up a known color space] named
      `$space`.

    * If `space` is not a [known color space], throw an error.

      > We cannot scale channels in an unknown space, since there are no
      > defined boundaries for a given channel to scale in relation to.

    * Let `color` be the result of [converting] `$color` to `space`.

* Otherwise:

  * Let `space` be `origin-space`.

  * Let `color` be the value of `$color`.

* Let `alpha` be `color`'s alpha property.

* If the keyword argument `$alpha` is specified in `$args`:

>     * If `alpha == none`, throw an error.

Reviewer 2: Why not treat it as zero? Or potentially just keep it as `none`?

Reviewer 3: I don't think CSS Colors 4 defines a valid usage of `none` for the alpha value. IIRC, it only has `none` for color space channels, not for the alpha.

Author: The current spec does allow alpha components to be set to `none` - see eg https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color-4/#missing:

> All color functions allow any of their components to be specified as [none](https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color-4/#valdef-color-none).

and https://drafts.csswg.org/css-color-4/#funcdef-rgb for explicit mention in a color function.

But yes, I think we can treat `none` as `0` in this case. Making that change.

    * Set `alpha` to the result of [scaling] `alpha` by `$alpha` with `max` 1.

* Let `channel-args` be the remaining keyword arguments in `$args`, not
  including `$space` or `$alpha` arguments.

* Let `channels` be a list of the `color`'s channels.

* For each keyword `scale`, `factor` in `channel-args`:

  * If `scale` is not the name of a [scalable] channel in `channels`, throw an
    error.

  * Let `channel` be the corresponding `channel` in `channels` with a name
    matching `scale`.

  * Let `max` be the upper boundary of `channel` in `space`.

>   * If `channel > max` or `channel < 0`, throw an error.

Reviewer 2: I'd like to avoid throwing errors in these functions as much as possible unless the user is doing something clearly incoherent. We can reasonable scale sub-0 channels up and supramaximum channels down; if the user tries to scale them in the opposite direction, I think we should just keep them as-is, since that's the asymptotic behavior approaching min/max.

    named `hsl`.

  * Otherwise, throw an error.

* Otherwise:

  * Let `space` be the result of [looking up a known color space] named
    `$space`.

  * If `space` is not a [known color space] with a polar-angle hue channel,
    throw an error.

    > This currently allows `hsl`, `hwb`, `lch`, and `oklch`. We may decide to
    > provide additional options in the future.

  * Let `space` be the value of `$space`.

* Return the result of calling
  `color.adjust($color, $hue: 180deg, $space: space)`.

### `color.invert()`

```
invert($color, $space: null)
```

This function is also available as a global function named `invert()`.

* If `$color` is not a color, throw an error.

* If `$space` is null:

  * If `$color` is a legacy color, let `space` be `rgb`, and let `mix-space`
    be null.

    > This allows us to also enforce legacy behavior in the final weighted mix.

  * Otherwise, throw an error.

* Otherwise:

  * Let `space` be the result of [looking up a known color space] named
    `$space`.

  * If `space` is not a [known color space], throw an error.

  * Let `mix-space` be `space`.

* Let `color` be the result of [converting] and [gamut mapping] `$color`

>   into the color space `space`.

Reviewer 2: Do we need to gamut-map here? We can theoretically meaningfully invert `color(srgb 2 -0.5 0.3)` into `color(srgb -1 1.5 0.7)`, right?
